the judgment was delivered by :
the court delivered judgment as follows :
judgment
fazl ali j. for the i have read the judgment prepared by my brother, mahajan j., and generally agree with his conclusions and reasonings, but, having regard to the importance of the points raised, i wish to add a short judgment of my own.
(1) whether the
the first and the third questions have been answered by the high court in favour of the appellant, and the second question has been answered in favour of the respondents. in this court, the appellant attacked the judgment of the high court in so far as it concerns the second question, whereas the first respondent attacked it in so far as it concerns the first and the third questions.
the
the respondents&amp;' contention may appear at the first sight to be a plausible one, but, in my opinion, it is not well founded in law. for the purpose of correctly deciding the question raised, we must first try to understand the meaning of the following items in entry 1 of list ii,
, and there can be no doubt that the british parliament while enacting that act was fully aware of the existing legislative practice obtaining in this country as well as of the fact that the provisions in question were sometimes necessary and therefore it empowered the central and provincial legislatures to make them under entry 53 of list i and entry 2 of list ii, respectively. this, in my opinion, is the true meaning of these entries, and it also explains why a separate entry was necessary enabling the two legislatures to legislate with regard to the power and jurisdiction of the courts in respect of the subject-matters mentioned in the three legislative lists. but for an express provision like that made in the entries referred to above, the two legislatures might not have been able to confer special jurisdiction on the courts in regard to the matters set out in the legislative lists, nor could they have been able to bar the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts in regard to them, however necessary or desirable such a course might have appeared to them.
it should be noted that the words used in these entries are : "jurisdiction and power". " power" is a comprehensive word, which includes all the procedural and substantive powers which may be exercised by a court, but the full significance of the use of the word in the context can be grasped only by reading a large number of local and special acts in which power has been given to courts to pass certain special and unusual orders. for example, section 13 of the indian
reference may also be made to section 24 of the
(see also section 10 of the
[act i of 1944], and section 13 of the
a reference to the acts passed after the enactment of the
, will show that special provisions with regard to the jurisdiction of courts have been made even after the passing of that act, in a large number of central and local acts. confining ourselves to the acts passed by the bombay legislature, since we are concerned here with one of such acts, we find that in the
(bombay act no. xix of 1938), section 3 empowers the following courts
similarly, in the
. section 19 of the
, and section 5 of the
has continued even after its enactment, and (2) that the words "jurisdiction and powers" have been consistently construed to bear the meaning which i have attributed to them.the interpretation which is sought to be put on the entries by the respondent is in my opinion open to the following objections : -
(1) it involves the curtailment of the meaning of the expression "administration of justice" in such a way as to rob it of its primary content - the jurisdiction and powers of the court, without which justice cannot be administered.
(2) it makes it necessary to read entry 2 of list ii as part of entry 1 of the same list, though it has been separately numbered as an independent entry. this is opposed to the scheme followed in the three legislative lists, which seems to be that each particular entry should relate to a separate subject or group of cognate subjects, each subject or group of subjects being independent of the others (subject only to incidental overlapping). the construction suggested by the respondents makes it necessary to assume that though according to their line of reasoning the words "jurisdiction and powers of courts, etc." occurring in entry 2 of list ii should have been put in entry 1 of the same list, being intimately connected with the subject of "administration of justice and the constitution and organization of courts", it was without any apparent reason numbered separately and made an independent entry.
, may be illustrated by one or two examples. reference might here be made to entry 26 of list i, which deals with "carriage of passengers and goods by sea or by air." it should be supposed that if any of the goods carried by air are lost and a suit is instituted in regard to them, the suit will be triable by the court having jurisdiction over the matter under the
did not contemplate such a result.we all know that at the date when the
, was passed, there were in existence in the different provinces a large number of courts of law and the administration of justice throughout the provinces was in the hands of these provincial courts. the civil courts in the province used to try all suits and proceedings of a civil nature which are triable under section 9 of the
, and the criminal courts used to try all criminal cases which are triable under the
. the jurisdiction and power of the courts were not confined to cases in regard to the subjects stated in list ii, nor were they debarred from dealing with cases relating to matters which have been assigned to list i. the jurisdiction of the courts depended in civil cases on a "cause of action" giving rise to a civil liability, and in criminal cases on the commission of an offence, and on the provisions made in the two codes of procedure as to the venue of the trial and other relevant matters. it seems to me that the
, did not contemplate any drastic change in the existing system of administration of justice, but what it contemplated was that that system should continue subject to future legislation by the proper legislature, central or provincial, barring the jurisdiction of courts or conferring jurisdiction or power on special courts with regard to the matters included in the appropriate legislative lists, should there be any occasion for such special legislation. under the
, every province became more or less an autonomous unit with a complete machinery for administering justice to the fullest extent. in my opinion, there nothing in the act of 1935 to show that there was any intention on the part of its framers to affect the machinery so drastically as to confine it to the administration of a mere partial or truncated kind of justice relating only to matters specified in list ii.mr. setalvad, the learned attorney-general, who appeared on behalf of the appellant, in supporting the impugned act, argued before us that for the purpose of deciding this appeal, we might also refer to entry 4 of list iii. his contention was that the impugned act having had the assent of the governor-general, it would be permissible to see what powers the provincial legislature could exercise under lists ii and iii taken together. if the course which he suggests is adopted, then the subjects on which the provincial legislature can legislate would be : (1) administration of justice; (2) constitution and organization of courts; and (3) civil procedure, including all matters included in the
at the date of the passing of the
. one of the matters included in the
it has been held in canada that the words referred to above include the power and jurisdiction of courts, and, under that item, the provincial legislature can confer the widest power on the courts. it seems to me that the approach suggested by the learned attorney-general is useful for testing whether entry 2 of list ii was intended to be treated as the sole and only basis of the power of the provincial legislature to confer jurisdiction on the provincial courts and whether it was really the intention of british parliament to empower the provincial legislature to confer jurisdiction of only such a limited character as can be conferred on the provincial courts under entry 2 of list ii, if that entry is treated as a self-sufficient entry. in my opinion, the correct view is to hold that it is not necessary to call into aid either entry 4 of list iii or any of the provisions of the canadian constitution in this case, and that the words "administration of justice; constitution and organization of courts" are by themselves sufficient to empower the provincial legislature to invest a new court with all the power which has been conferred upon it by the impugned act. it is of course open to the central legislature to bar the jurisdiction of the new court by a special enactment with regard to any of the matters in list i, but so long as such jurisdiction is not barred, be court will have jurisdiction try all suits and proceedings of a civil nature as enacted in the act in question. i think that if the provincial legislature had merely enhanced the pecuniary jurisdiction of any of the existing civil courts there could have been no objection to that course. why then should there be any objection when, instead of investing one of the existing courts with power to try suits and proceedings of a civil nature not exceeding a certain amount, the legislature has created a new court and invested it with the same power.perhaps, it will be simpler to deal at this stage with the third question, namely, whether the bombay city civil has jurisdiction to try a suit based on a promissory note. so far as this point is concerned, the respondent bases his contention on entries 28 and 33 of list i. entry 28 relates to "cheques, bills of exchange, promissory notes and other like in instruments". entry 53, as already stated, relates to
it is contended on behalf of the respondent that the effect of these two entries, when they are read together, is that no court can try a suit relating to a promissory note, unless it is invested with the jurisdiction to try such a suit by the central legislature by virtue of the power given by entry 53 of list i. the question so raised is covered by the answer to the first question, and i shall only add that the answer already given to that question finds some support in the case of prafulla kumar mukherjee and other v. bank of commerce limited, khulnal [
, which limited the amount recoverable by a money-lender on his loans and interests on them, and prohibited the payments of sums larger than those permitted by the act. the validity of the act was questioned by the respondent bank in certain suits brought by them to recover loans and interests alleged to be due on promissory notes executed by the appellants-borrowers as well as in suits brought by the debtors claiming relief under the act. the argument put forward on behalf of the bank was that the bengal legislature by the impugned act had attempted to legislate on subjects expressly forbidden to it and expressly and exclusively reserved for the federal legislature, that is to say, in relation to promissory notes and banking, which are reserved for the federal legislature exclusively, under entries 28 and 38 respective of list i. on the other hand, the arguments put forward on behalf of the appellants was that the impugned act was in pith and substance legislation dealing with money-lending and that in so far as it dealt with promissory notes or banking that was only incidental or ancillary to the effective use of the admitted legislative powers of the provincial legislature to deal with money-lending. this argument of the appellants was substantially accepted by the privy council.the second point raised on behalf of the respondent relates to the validity of section 4 of the act, which runs as follows :-
it is contended that this section is invalid, because the provincial legislature has thereby delegated its legislative powers to the provincial government which it cannot do. this contention does not appear to me to be sound. the section itself shows that the provincial legislature having exercised its judgment and determined that the new court should be invested with jurisdiction to try suits and proceedings of a civil nature of a value not exceeding rs. 25, 000, left it to the provincial government to determine when the court should be invested with this larger jurisdiction, for which the limit had been fixed. it is clear that if and when the new court has to be invested with the larger jurisdiction, that jurisdiction would be due to no other authority than the provincial legislature itself and the court would exercise that jurisdiction by virtue of the act itself. as several of my learned colleagues have pointed out, the case of queen v. burah
jurisdiction and powers of all courts except the federal court with respect to any of the matters in this list
the position is similar here. &amp;'civil procedure&amp;' in the concurrent legislative list must be held to exclude matters relating to jurisdiction and powers of courts since special provision is made for those matters elsewhere in the lists."" to hold otherwise", they pointed out," would be completely to wipe out the second entry in the provincial legislative list
it would be practically impossible for example to define each item in the provincial list in such a way as to make it exclusive of every item in that list and parliament seems to have been content to take a number of comprehensive categories and to describe each of them by words of broad and general import. .... i think, however, that none of the items in the lists is to be read in a narrow or restricted sense and that each general word should be held to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be said to be comprehended in it.
that a particular act regarded from one aspect might be intra vires of a provincial legislature and yet regarded from another aspect might also be intra vires of the dominion parliament. in other words, what is properly to be called the subject-matter of an act may depend upon what is the true aspect of the act. the cases which illustrated this principle show, by &amp;'aspect&amp;' here must be understood the aspect or point of view of the legislator in legislation - the object, purpose and scope of the legislation. the words is used subjectively of the legislator rather than objectively of the matter legislated upon.
(b) by the high court for the relief of insolvent debtors, or
(c) by the high court under any special law other than the letters patent, or
(d) by the small cause court :
12. notwithstanding anything contained in any law, the high court shall not have jurisdiction to try suits and proceedings cognisable by the city court :
provided that the high court may, for any special reason, and at any stage remove for trial by itself any suit or proceeding from the city court.
their lordships think that it is a fallacy to speak of the powers thus conferred upon the lieutenant-governor (large as they undoubtedly are) as if, when they were exercised, of efficacy the acts done under them would be due to any other legislative authority than that of the governor-general in council. their whole operation is, directly and immediately, under and by virtue of this act (xxii of 1869) itself. the proper legislature has exercised its judgment as to place, person, laws, powers, and the result of that judgment has been to legislate conditionally as to all these things. the conditions having been fulfilled, the legislations is now absolute. where plenary powers of legislation exist as to particular subjects, whether in an imperial or in a provincial legislature, they may (in their lordship&amp;'s judgment) be well exercised, either absolutely or conditionally. legislation, conditional on the use of particular powers, or on the exercise of a limited discretion, entrusted by the legislature to persons in whom it places confidence, is no uncommon thing; and, in many circumstances it may be highly convenient. the british statute book abounds with examples of it; and it cannot be supposed that the imperial parliament did not, when constituting the indian legislature, contemplate this kind of conditional legislation as within the scope of the legislative power which it from time to time conferred. it certainly used no words to exclude it.
provided that the provincial government may, by notification, on a resolution passed by the bihar legislative assembly and agreed to by the bihar legislative council, direct that this act shall remain in force for a further period of one year with such modifications, if any, as may be specified is the notification.
, we find that the legislature in the exercise of its legislative power has set up a civil court with a limited jurisdiction under section 5 of the act. it has not set up a court with jurisdiction higher than ten thousand rupees. having set up a court of limited jurisdiction it has given to the provincial government under section 4 the power to confer upon that court a higher jurisdiction up to twenty-five thousand rupees. now this power which is conferred upon the provincial government is a power which could only have been exercised by the legislature itself.
....
that the provincial government may, by notification on a resolution passed by the bihar legislative assembly and agreed to by the bihar legislative council direct that this act shall remain in force for a further period of one year with such modifications, if any, as may be specified in the notification.
the administration of justice and constitution and organization of all courts except the federal court
jurisdiction and powers of all courts except the federal court with respect to any of the matters in this list
the subjects dealt with in the three legislative lists are not always set out with scientific definition. it would be practically impossible for example to define each item in the provincial list in such a way as to make it exclusive of every other item in that list, and parliament seems to have been content to take a number of comprehensive categories and to describe each of them by a word of broad and general import....... i think that none of the items in the list is to be read in a narrow or restricted sense, and that each general word should be held to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be said to be comprehended in it.
it could not have been the intention that a conflict should exist and in order to prevent such a result the two sections must be read together and the language of the one interpret and where necessary modified by the other.
1. (2) it shall come into force on such date as the provincial government may, by notification in the official gazette, appoint in this behalf.
(b) by the high court for the relief of insolvent debtors, or
(c) by the high court under any special law other than the letters patent, or
(d) by the small cause court :
provided that the provincial government may, from time to time, after consultation with the high court, by a like notification extend the jurisdiction of the city court to any suits or proceedings of the nature specified in clauses (a) and (b).
4. subject to the exceptions specified in section 3, the provincial government may, by notification in the official gazette, invest the city court with jurisdiction to receive, try and dispose of all suits and other proceedings of a civil nature arising within the greater bombay and of such value not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees as may be specified in the notification.
12. notwithstanding anything contained in any law, the high court shall not have jurisdiction to try suits and proceedings cognizable by the city court :
provided that the high court may, for any special reason, and at any stage, remove for trial by itself any suit or proceeding from the city court.
except that the said high court shall not have such original jurisdiction in cases falling within the jurisdiction of the small cause court at bombay or the bombay city civil court.
in exercise of the powers conferred by section 4 of the
(bombay act xl of 1948), the government of bombay is pleased to invest, with effect from and on the date of this notification, the city court with jurisdiction in receive, try and dispose of all suits and other proceedings of a civil nature not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees in value, and arising within the greater bombay subject, however, to the exceptions specified in section 3 of the said act.
(3) whether the government of bombay notification no. 2346/5 dated 20th january, 1950, is ultra vires, void and inoperative in law.
the said lieutenant-governor may from time to time, by notification in the calcutta gazette, extend mutatis mutandis all or any of the provisions contained in the other sections of this act to the jaintia hills, the naga hills, and to such portion of the khasi hills, as for the time being forms part of british india.
every such notification shall specify the boundaries of the territories to which it applies.
this having been done as to the garo hills, what was done as to the khasi and jaintia hills ? the legislature decided that it was fit and proper that the adjoining district of the khasi and jaintia hills should also be removed from the jurisdiction of the existing courts, and brought under the same provisions with the garo hills, not necessarily and at all events, but if and when the lieutenant-governor should think it desirable to do so; and that it was also possible that it might be expedient that not all, but some only, of those provisions should be applied to that adjoining district. and accordingly the legislature entrusted for these purposes also, a discretionary power to the lieutenant-governor."
finally, his lordship concluded at p. 195 :
provided that the provincial government may, by notification, on a resolution passed by the bihar legislative assembly and agreed to by the bihar legislative council, direct that this act shall remain in force for a further period of one year with such modifications, if any, as may be specified in the notification."
three of the learned judges held that the proviso and the notification thereunder were ultra vires and void. they laid particular emphasis on the power given to the provincial government to make any modification in the act when extending its life as indicating that it was a delegation of legislative power. another learned judge did not decide this point but agreed to set aside the order of detention on another ground not material for our present purpose and the remaining learned judge took a different view of the effect of the proviso and held that it was a conditional legislation within the meaning of the decision in r. v. burah [l.r. 5 i.a. 178]. i do not find it necessary, for the purposes of the present appeal, to express any view as to the correctness of the decision of the federal court in that case. assuming, but without deciding, that the entrustment with the provincial government of the power to extend the life of an act with such modifications as the provincial government in its unfettered discretion thought fit to make was nothing but a delegation of legislative powers, there is no such power of modification given to the provincial government by section 4 of the
, and, therefore, that decision of the federal court can have no application to the case before us.the learned attorney-general wants to go further and contend that under the
, it was permissible for the legislatures, central or provincial, while acting within their respective legislative fields, to delegate their legislative powers. in the view i have expressed above, namely, that section 4 of the
