the judgment was delivered by kania c.j.
(1) how can the propriety of the tribunal's decision be tested on appeal, and
their lordships of the privy council undoubtedly felt that these were serious questions, but they had no hesitation in saying that
,
it is to be noted that under section 15 of the
our attention was however drawn to the proviso to section 15(2), which runs as follows :-
it is necessary here to say a few words as to the scope of the appeal. as was pointed out by this court in pritam singh v. the state
being a special power is to be exercised only in special cases. the rule so laid down is bound to restrict the scope of the appeal in practice in almost all the cases which fall under article 136. but in some cases a limitation will be imposed on the scope of the appeal by the very nature of the case and of the tribunal from which an appeal is sought to be brought, and a case under the
dealing now with the merits of the appeal, i am not prepared to hold that this is a proper case for interference with the adjudication of the tribunal. the power of this court was invoked by the appellants on four grounds. these grounds have been elaborately examined by mahajan j. and two of them have been pronounced to be wholly inadequate for justifying our interference. my view with regard to these two grounds is identical with that of mahajan j. and i do not wish to add to what he has already said on the subject. the remaining two grounds also are, in my opinion, wholly insufficient to justify the exercise of our special power under article 136. one of these grounds is that the award of the tribunal is based on no evidence whatsoever. i do not, however, find that this ground was urged in this form in the application for special leave to appeal to this court. all that was intended to be urged was that the appellants wanted to adduce evidence but were not allowed to do so. from the decision of the tribunal, however, it appears that the evidence that was shut out related to one isolated point only and the tribunal might well have been justified in not allowing evidence to be admitted on a point which in its opinion had no direct bearing on the issue before them. after hearing the respondents on this particular point, i am disposed to hold that the tribunal has committed such an error as would justify the interference of this court.the last ground urged is that the award has been signed by only two members of the tribunal though it originally consisted of three persons and though the entire hearing of the dispute had taken place before all the three persons. the objection does not appear to me to be fatal to the jurisdiction of the tribunal, because under section 8 of the act it is not obligatory on the government to appoint a new number to fill a vacancy if one of the members ceases to be available at any time during the proceedings. under that section, if the chairman ceases to be available, the government must appoint his successor, whereas if a member ceases to be available the government may or may not appoint any one to fill his place. in the present case, our attention was drawn to some correspondence which shows that one of the members was called upon to act as a member of another tribunal and the award in question was pronounced after informing the government of the procedure which the chairman and the remaining members intended to adopt.
in the view i have taken, this appeal must fail, and i would accordingly dismiss it with costs.
mahajan j. - this is an appeal by special leave from the determination of an industrial dispute by the industrial tribunal appointed under ordinance vi of 1949.
bharath bank limited, delhi, the appellant, is a company registered under the
its employees made certain demands and as a result of an unfavourable response from the bank it appears that they struck work on the 9th march, 1949. the bank in its turn served notices on them to resume work and proceeded to discharge a number of them between the 19th march and 24th march as they failed to do so. the central government constituted a tribunal consisting of three persons for the adjudication of industrial disputes in banking companies under section 7 of the
(xiv of 1947) . the disputes mentioned in schedule ii of the notification were referred under section 10 of the act to this tribunal. item 18 of this schedule reads as follows :-"retrenchment and victimization (specific cases to be cited by employees)."
the dispute under this item between the bharat bank and its employees was heard by the tribunal at delhi and its award was made on the 19th january 1950. it was published in the government of india gazette, dated 4th february, 1950, and was declared to be binding for a period of one year. the award of the tribunal was signed by two out of its three members.
a preliminary objection was raised on the behalf of the central government as well as on behalf of the respondents that this court had no jurisdiction to grant special leave to appeal against the determination of an industrial tribunal inasmuch as it did not exercise the judicial powers of the state and that its determination was not in the nature of a judgment, decree or order of a court so as to be appealable. this being the first case in which special leave was granted from the determination of an industrial tribunal, it is necessary to examine the provisions of the constitution dealing with this matter and if possible, to define the limits of the jurisdiction of this court under article 136. this article is in these terms :-
article 124 deals with the establishment and constitution of the supreme court. article 131 confers original jurisdiction on this court in certain disputes arising between the government of india and the states etc. articles 132 and 133 deals with the appellate jurisdiction of the court in appeals from high courts within the territory of india in civil matters. by article 134 limited right of appeal in criminal cases has been allowed. the judicial committee of the privy council which was the highest court of appeal for india prior to 10th october, 1949, was not a court of the criminal appeal in the sense in which this court has been made a court of criminal appeal under article 134. it could only entertain appeals on the criminal side in exercise of the prerogative of the king. article 135 empowers this court to hear all appeals which under existing laws could be heard by the federal court of india. by the
, which came into force on the 10th october, 1949, all the powers that were possessed by the judicial committee of the privy council in regard to cases or matters arising in india became exercisable by the federal court of india whether those powers were exercisable by reason of statutory authority or under the prerogative of the king. the powers of the judicial committee were conferred upon it by the
, where the phrase used was "a court of justice". it is the introduction of this new expression in article 136 that has led to considerable argument as to its scope. another expression that did not find place in the
but has been introduced in article 136 is the word "determination". a question has been raised as to the meaning to be given to these words in the article. on the one hand, it was contended that the words "determination" and "tribunal" were introduced in the article in order to bring within the scope of the appellate jurisdiction of this court all orders of tribunals of different varieties and descriptions. on the other hand, it was said that the words "determination" and "tribunal" were added in the article by way of abundant caution and the intention was that if a tribunal exercised the judicial powers of the state and the decision passed in exercise of that power, this court as the highest judicial court in the republic would have power, if it considered necessary in the ends of justice, to grant special leave. clause (2) of article 136 excludes the jurisdiction of this court in respect of military courts or tribunal. it is interesting to observe that in articles 138, 139 and 140 the constitution has conferred powers on parliament for further enlargement of the powers of this court.two points arise for determination in this case : (1) whether the word "tribunal" in this article has been used in the same sense as "court" or whether it has been used in a wider sense, and (2) whether the word "determination" in the article includes within its scope the determinations made by industrial tribunals or other similarly constituted bodies or whether it has reference only to determinations of a court or a tribunal of a purely judicial character. it was conceded by the learned counsel appearing for the central government, mr. alladi krishnaswami aiyar, that if any tribunal, whether administrative, domestic or quasi-judicial, acts in excess of its jurisdiction, then it can be controlled by the high court under the powers conferred on them by article 226 by the issue of a writ of certiorari. it was said that if the industrial tribunal in this case could be proved to have trespassed beyond the limits of its statutory jurisdiction, then the remedy lies elsewhere and not by a petition of special leave under article 136. mr. alladi's contentions may be briefly summarized as follows : (1) the expression "tribunal" means seat of a judge, or a court of justice. its necessary attribute is that it can give a final judgment between two parties which carries legal sanction by its own force. that the word "tribunal" in juxtaposition to the word "court" could only mean a tribunal which exercised judicial functions of the state and did not include within its ambit a tribunal which had quasi-judicial or administrative powers. (2) the kind of orders against which special leave to appeal could be given under article 136 have to be of the same nature as passed by a court; in other words, it was said that unless there was a judicial determination of a controversy between two parties, the order would not be appealable. that in the case of an industrial tribunal what gives binding force to the award is the declaration of the government, that the spark of life to it is given by that declaration and without that, the award of the tribunal is lifeless and has no enforceability and hence cannot be held to be of an appealable nature. it was further said that in cases between/the government and its employees, by the procedure prescribed in the act the award could also be rejected and that being so, by its own determination a tribunal could not impose a liability or affect rights. dr. bakshi tek chand, appearing for the bank, on the other hand argued that whenever a tribunal, whether exercising judicial or quasi-judicial functions, determined a matter in a judicial manner, then such a determination is within article 136. it was said that an industrial tribunal has no administrative or executive functions, that its duty is to adjudicate on an industrial dispute, i.e., to act as a judge, on certain kinds of disputes between employers and employees and that its functions are of a judicial nature, though the ambit of the powers conferred is larger than that of an ordinary court of law inasmuch as it can grant reliefs which no court of law could give, but that is because of the powers conferred on it by law. it was argued that the plain words of the article should not be given a narrow meaning where the intention of the constitution was to confer the widest power on this court. it was further contended that as between private employers and employees and even in certain cases between government and its employees the decision of the tribunal was binding on the government and government had no power either to affirm, modify or reject it. all that it was authorised to do was to announce it and by its declaration give it enforceability; that fact, however, could not affect the question of appealability of the determination under article 136. it was finally argued that powers should be exercised by this court wherever there is a miscarriage of justice by a determination of any tribunal and that if the intention of the constitution by use of the word "tribunal" was in the same sense as "court," then it was not necessary to import it in article 136, because all tribunals that exercise judicial functions fall within the definition of the word "court" though they may not have been so described.after considerable thought i have reached the conclusion that the preliminary objection should be overruled. i see no cogent reasons to limit the plain words of the statute and to place a narrow interpretation on words of widest amplitude used therein. in construing the articles of the
it has always to be remembered that india has been constituted into a sovereign democratic republic in order to ensure justice to all its citizens. in other words, the foundations of this republic have been laid on the bedrock of justice. to safeguard these foundations so that they may not be undermined by injustice occurring anywhere this court has been constituted. by article 32 of the
the court is empowered to see that the fundamental rights conferred on the citizens by the constitution are not in any way affected. by article 136 it has been given overriding power to grant special leave to appeal against orders of court and tribunals which go against the principle of natural justice and lead to grave miscarriage of justice. the exercise of these powers could only have been contemplated in cases which affect the rights of people living within the territory of india in respect of their person, property or status. the question, therefore, for consideration is whether the jurisdiction conferred by use of unambiguous phraseology and by words which have a plain grammatical meaning and are of the widest amplitude should be limited and restricted on considerations suggested by mr. alladi. the construction suggested by the learned counsel, if accepted, would in the first instance make the use of certain words in the article unnecessary and redundant and would run counter to the spirit of the constitution. it must be presumed that the draftsmen of the constitution knew well the fact that there were a number of tribunals constituted in this country previous to the coming into force of the constitution which were performing certain administrative, quasi-judicial or domestic functions, that some of them had even the trappings of a court but in spite of those trappings could not be given that description. it must also be presumed that the constitution-makers were aware of the fact that the highest courts in this country had held that all tribunals that discharged judicial functions fell within the definition of the expression "court". if by the use of the word "tribunal" in article 136 the intention was to give it the same meaning as "court", then it was redundant and unnecessary to import it in the article because, by whatever name described, such a tribunal would fall within the definition of the word "court". the word "court" has a well-known meaning in legislative history and practice.as pointed out in halsbury's laws of england, the word "court" originally meant the king's palace but subsequently acquired the meaning of (1) a place where justice was administered, and (2) the person or persons who administer it. in the
as pointed out in picturesque language by lord sankey l.c. in shell co. of australia v. federal commissioner of taxation,
it was conceded that a tribunal constituted under the
, exercise quasi-judicial powers. that phrase implies that a certain content of the judicial power of the state is vested in it and it is called upon to exercise it. an attempt was made to define the words " judicial"and" quasi-judicial" in the case of cooper v. wilson
the extents of judicial power exercised by an industrial tribunal will be considered hereinafter in the light of the observations cited above.
reference was made to certain passages from professor allen's book on law and order, chapter iv, page 69, where mention is made of the kinds of administrative tribunals functioning in various countries today. porter on administrative law, 1929 edn., page 194, was also relied upon. there can be no doubt that varieties of administrative tribunals and domestic tribunals are known to exist in this country as well as in other countries of the world but the real question to decide in each case is as to the extent of judicial power of the state exercised by them. tribunals which do not derive authority from the sovereign power cannot fall within the ambit of article 136. the condition precedent for bringing a tribunal within the ambit of article 136 is that it should be constituted by the state. again a tribunal would be outside the ambit of article 136 if it is not invested with any part of the judicial functions of the state but discharges purely administrative or executive duties. tribunals, however, which are found invested with certain functions of a court of justice and have some of its trappings also would fall within the ambit of article 136 and would be subject to the appellate control of this court whenever it is found necessary to exercise that control in the interests of justice.
it is now convenient to consider whether a tribunal constituted under the
considerable stress was laid by mr. alladi on the provisions of sections 15 and 19 of the act. section 15 enacts as follows :-
. the opposite answer to this contention may be given in the language of the decision in rex v. electricity commissioners
rex. v. minister of health
, by section 40 a local authority which had prepared an improvement scheme was required to present a petition to the minister praying that an order should be made confirming such scheme. sub-section (3) provided that the minister after considering the petition may cause a local inquiry to be made and may by order confirm the scheme with or without conditions or modifications. in sub-section (5) it was stated that the order of the minister when made shall have effect as if enacted in this act. it was held by the court of appeal that as the order made by the minister was made without the statutory conditions having been compiled with it was ultra vires and therefore a writ of certiorari should issue for the purpose of quashing it. reliance was placed by scrutton l.j. on rex v. electricity commissioners
the cases were in re barnett [4 moo. 453], harrison v. scott [5 moo. 357], and attorney general of jamaica v. manderson [6 moo. 239]. the phraseology employed in article 136 itself justifies this course. the article empowers this court to grant special leave against sentences or orders made by any court. in all other articles of the
three australian cases were cited which concern the construction of sections 51, 71 and 72 of the australian constitution (63 and 64 vict., c. 12). section 72 requires that every justice of the high court and every justice of any other court created by the parliament of the commonwealth shall subject to the power of removal contained in the section be appointed for life. section 71 confers the whole judicial power of the commonwealth upon the courts therein mentioned and no other tribunal or body can exercise that power. every court referred to in section 71 has to be constituted in the manner provided by section 72. the question in these cases was as to the meaning of the phrase "judicial power of the commonwealth." similar phraseology has not been used in any part of the constitution of india and in these circumstances it is difficult to derive any assistance from these decisions in solving the problem before us. the
is not modelled on the constitution of australia and that being so, any observations made in decisions given under that constitution cannot be held to be a safe guide in the interpretation of language employed in a constitution differently drafted.
it was argued that the industrial tribunal here was an arbitration tribunal of the same kind as in australia and exercises similar functions. it is however pertinent to observe that the phraseology employed in section 15 of the indian act is different from that used in the australian statute. the indian statute has constituted different bodies for different purposes. an industrial tribunal has been constituted only to discharge one function of adjudication. it is not described as an arbitral tribunal. the act has avoided the use of the word "arbitration" either in its preamble or in any of its relevant provisions though the determination has been named as an award. in these circumstances it is unsafe to seek any guidance from observations made in this case.
the next case to which reference was made in rola co. (australia) proprietary ltd. v. the commonwealth
, did not exercise the judicial power of the commonwealth. it was held that the board exercised functions which were arbitral in character. emphasis was laid on a passage occurring in page 198 of the report which reads as follows :-
the law as to judicial privilege has in process of time developed. originally it was intended for the protection of judges sitting in recognised courts of justice established as such. the object no doubt was that judges might exercise their function free from any danger that they might be called to account for any words spoken as judges. the doctrine has been extended to tribunals exercising functions equivalent to those of an established court of justice. in their lordships' opinion the law on the subject was accurately stated by lord esher in royal aquarium etc., ltd. v. parkinson [1892 1 q.b. 431], where he says that the privilege'applies wherever there is an authorised inquiry which, through not before a court of justice, is before a tribunal which has similar attributes.... this doctrine has never been extended further than to courts of justice and tribunals acting in a manner similar to that in which such courts act'.
if the services of the chairman of a board or of the chairman or other member of a court or tribunal cease to be available at any time the appropriate government shall, in the case of a chairman and may in the case of any other member, appoint another independent person to fill the vacancy, and the proceedings shall be continued before the board, court or tribunal so reconstituted.
in every case so submitted, the confirmation of the sentences or order passed by the court of the resident at hyderabad shall, when such court consists of two or more judges, be made, passed and signed by at least two of them.
a clear distinction is to be drawn between judicial and quasi-judicial powers.
(1) notwithstanding anything in this chapter, the supreme court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of india."
bakshi sir tek chand on the other hand lays stress on the fact that the word "determination" was not in the original draft constitution, and it was subsequently added presumably with view to widen the scope of article 136 and include within it, the decisions of administrative and quasi-judicial tribunals also. he points out that according to the definition given in section 2(b) of the
.
patanjali sastri j. - i entirely agree with the judgment just now delivered by mukherjea j. and i have nothing to add.
appeal dismissed.
agent for the appellant : ganpat rai for tanubhai c. desai.
agent for the respondent : r. r. biswas.
agent for the union of india : p. a. mehta.
