patanjali sastri c.j.
mahajan j. - this is an appeal from the judgment and decree of the high court of judicature at bombay passed on the 29th day of august, 1950, in appeal no. 48 of 1950
the appeal concerns the validity of the same piece of legislation that was considered by this court in the case of chiranjit lal chowdhuri. there an ordinary shareholder of the defendant company holding one fully paid up share claimed relief under article 32 of the
on the ground that the provisions of the
, abridged his fundamental rights conferred under article 14, 19 and 31 of the
. this court by a majority of 3 to 2 dismissed the petition holding that the presumption in regard to the constitutionality of the act had not been displaced by the petitioner and that it had not been proved that the impugned statute was a hostile or a discriminatory piece of legislation as against him, or that the state had taken possession of his share. the minority held that the impugned statute was void as it abridged the petitioner's fundamental rights under article 14 of the
. this decision was delivered on 4th december, 1950the suit of which this appeal arises was decided by the high court of bombay during the pendency of chiranjit lal chowdhuri's petition in this court. most of the facts furnishing the cause of action for the suit have been detailed in the judgment of this court in that case, but it seems necessary to briefly restate them for a proper appreciation of the contentions that have been raised in the appeal
the sholapur spinning and weaving co. ltd., was incorporated under the indian companies act with an authorized capital of rs. 48 lakhs divided into 1, 590 fully paid up ordinary shares of rs. 1, 000 each, 20 fully paid up ordinary shares of rs. 500 each, and 32, 000 partly paid up cumulative preference shares of rs. 100 each, the paid up capital of the company being rs. 32 lakhs comprised of rs. 16 lakhs fully paid up ordinary shares and rs. 16 lakhs partly paid up preference shares, rs. 50 being unpaid on each of the 32, 000 cumulative preference shares. the company did good business and declared high dividends for some time; but in the year 1949, there was accumulation of stocks and financial difficulties. in order to overcome this situation the directors decided to close the mills and on the 27th july, 1949, they gave notice of this decision to the workers. pursuant to this notice the mills were closed on the 27th august, 1949. this created a labour problem and to solve it the government on the 5th october, 1949, appointed a controller to supervise the affairs of the mills under the
. on the 9th november, 1949, the controller in order to resolve the deadlock decided to call in more capital and he asked the directors of the company to make a call of rs. 50 per share on the preference shares. the directors refused to comply with this requisition, as in their judgment that was not in the interest of the company. thereupon the governor general on the 9th january, 1950, promulgated the impugned ordinance, under which the mills could be managed and run by directors appointed by the central government. on the 9th january, 1950, the central government acting under section 15 of the ordinance delegated all its powers to the government of bombay. the government of bombay then appointed certain directors who took over the assets and management of the mills. on the 7th february, 1950, they passed a resolution making a call of rs. 50 on each of the preference shares payable at the time stated in the resolution. pursuant to this resolution a notice was addressed on the 22nd february, 1950, to the plaintiff in the suit, who held preference shares, to pay rs. 1, 62, 000 the amount of the said call on or before the 3rd april, 1950. the plaintiff instead of meeting the demand, filed the present suit on the 28th march 1950, in a representative capacity on behalf of himself and other preference shareholders against the company and the directors appointed by the government of bombay challenging the validity of the ordinance and questioning the right of the directors to make the call. on the 19th april, 1950, notice was given to the attorney general of india of the suit and the union of india was added as defendant no. 9 thereinthe principal allegations in the suit were that the ordinance was illegal, ultra vires and invalid as it contravened the provisions of section 299(2) of the
, and all the provisions contained in part iii of the constitution, and that the resolution of the directors dated 7th february, 1950, making a call was illegal and ultra vires, as the law under which they were appointed was itself invalid. the plaintiff claimed relief in the form of a declaration regarding the invalidity of the ordinance and prayed for an injunction restraining the directors from giving effect to the resolution. the defendants denied the correctness of the contentions put forward by the plaintiff
mr. justice bhagwati who tried the suit, framed the following issues therein:
2. whether section 4(d) of the ordinance is illegal, ultra vires, and void in law as alleged; and
3. whether the resolution dated the 7th february, 1950, made by defendants 2 to 6 is illegal, ultra vires, void and inoperative in law for the reasons mentioned in paragraph 6 of the plaint or any of them
by his judgment dated the 28th june, 1950, the learned judge answered all the three issues in the negative and dismissed the suit and this decision was affirmed on appeal. it was held that by force of the ordinance the state had neither acquired the property of the plaintiff, nor of the company, nor had it taken possession of it, but that the title to the property and its possession were with the respective owners, and the state was only supervising the affairs of the company through its nominated directors. it was further held that the ordinance had not in any manner infringed the rights of the plaintiff under article 14 of the
and there had been to him no denial of equality before the law or equal protection of laws, as the ordinance was based on a classification which rested upon a ground having a fair and substantial relation to the object of the legislation and that it had a reasonable basis for the classification. it was also held that the restrictions imposed on the right of the appellant and the company to hold his or its property were imposed in the interests of the general publicthe principal questions for consideration in this appeal are:
; and
the preamble of the ordinance states:
the majority of the court in chiranjitlal chowdhuri's case was inclined to take the view that that was the true effect of the provisions of the ordinance. mukharjea j., with whose views kania c.j. concurred, and to whose views to a certain extent fazl ali j. subscribed on this part of the case, said as follows :
mr. justice patanjali sastri, as he then was, held that the effect of the act was that all the properties and effects of the company passed into the absolute power and control of the central government and the normal function of the company as a corporate body came to an end. mr. justice das on this part of the case said as follows:
the learned attorney general combated this view and strenuously argued that the ordinance could not be construed in the manner suggested above and on its true construction its effect was that the government took under its superintendence the affairs of the company without in any way disturbing its title in the property and that the shareholders have sill to a certain extent an effective voice in its affairs. illustratively he said that the company was in the same state as a disqualified owner is under the provisions of the court of wards act and that the provisions of the ordinance should be construed in that light. to emphasize the same point of view reference was also made to the provisions of the lunancy act, the provisions of sections 52a and 52b introduced in the
, the provisions of the
(li of 1951), and also to the provisions of act lxv of 1951 (
), and it was contended that the impugned ordinance was a piece of social control legislation as were the provisions contained in the statutes referred to above
in my opinion, these contentions are not well founded. reference to illustrative pieces of legislation designed on the same pattern is neither very happy nor apposite; on the other hand, it is apt to mislead because except in the case of the court of wards act, all the laws to which reference was made were enacted after the enactment of the ordinance in question. the different court of wards acts being existing laws have been excepted from the fundamental right guaranteed by article 31(2). that being so, they can afford little assistance in judging the validity of the impugned law. in dealing with constitutional matters of this kind it is always well to bear in mind what bradley j. speaking for the court said in boyd v. united states at page 635
these illustrative pieces of legislation to which the learned attorney general made reference may well have to be judged in the light of these observations when occasion arises. reference may also be made to the observations of holmes c.j. in pennsylvania coal co. v. mahon, wherein that learned judge said as follows :
for the reasons given above i am of the opinion that the impugned statute has overstepped the limits of legitimate social control legislation and has infringed the fundamental right of the company guaranteed to it under article 31(2) of the
next it was contended that the ordinance in question in any event could not fall within the mischief of article 31(2) because the state had not acquired title in the property of the company under its provisions and that whatever possession had been taken had been taken for the purpose of managing the company's property on the company's behalf and that it had not been requisitioned for any state purposes. it was said that unless the property of the company by the provisions of the ordinance was vested in the state or was commandeered by the state for state purposes, article 31(2) could not be invoked to judge the constitutionality of the ordinance, that article 31(2) covered within its ambit only two forms of taking of property by the state, namely, where the state acquired title in the property or where the state temporarily commandeered it, and that all other forms of taking the property were outside the fundamental right guaranteed by article 31(2). it was suggested that the scope of the protection given to private property by our constitution was not as large as it was contained in the fifth amendment of the constitution of the united states of america. according to the learned attorney general, the true content of the fundamental right guaranteed by article 31(1) was that a person could not be deprived of his property except by statutory authority, but once a law was made depriving a person of his property then the article afforded no further protection. support for this contention was sought to be derived from the reasoning employed in gopalan's case. there it was held that the freedoms relating to the person of a citizen guaranteed by article 19 assume the existence of a free citizen and can no longer be enjoyed if a citizen is deprived of his liberty by the law of preventive or punitive detention. in like manner it was argued that the freedom relating to the property guaranteed by article 19 also vanished as soon as a person was deprived of his property under a law enacted by an appropriate legislature. the learned attorney general suggested that the two clauses of article 31 were in the nature of two exceptions to the provisions of article 19(1)(f). the first exception was that the guarantee of freedom given by article 19(1)(f) could be defeated simply by enacting a statute and the second exception was that it could also be defeated by the state acquiring title in the property in exercise of its power of eminent domain within the limited field prescribed by article 31(2) but that if a certain deprivation of property did not fall within the prescribed field of article 31(2) and fell within article 31(1), then for such deprivation no compensation was payable. as regards clause (5) which excepted certain laws from the ambit of article 31(2), it was argued that this clause had been inserted in the article by way of abundant cautionin my judgment, none of these contentions have any validity. the construction sought to be placed by the learned attorney general on the language of article 31 is neither borne out by the phraseology employed in that article nor by the scheme of part iii of the constitution. it seems to me that our constitution subject to certain exceptions has guaranteed the fullest protection to private property. it has not only provided that no person can be deprived of property by the executive without legislative sanction but it has further provided that even the legislature cannot deprive a person of his property unless there is a public purpose and then only on payment of compensation. this article provides as follows:
similar observations were made by my brother in the bihar zamindari case. undoubtedly great weight must be given to the opinion expressed on this question by my learned brother and had i not felt convinced that his approach to this question was illiberal and restricted, i would have hesitated to differ from his views. after a full consideration of the problem and after giving due weight to the reasoning of any learned brother, i am unable, for reasons above stated, to agree with him. the objections envisaged by my brother in chiranjit lal chowdhuri's case against the suggestion that clauses (1) and (2) of article 31 deal with the same topic of compulsory acquisition or taking of property do not at all oppress me and do not seem to me to be insurmountable or cogent
on the assumption that clauses (1) and (2) of article 31 deal with the same topic, it is not clear to me why in that context article 31(1) somehow becomes redundant. this is the only clause in the article which gives protection to private property from being taken under executive orders without legislative sanction behind them. the first requisite for the exercise of the power of eminent domain is that it can only be exercised pursuant to law. it was necessary while delimiting the field of eminent domain to state that in the article. if the state had been entitled by clause (1) to take away private property merely by making a law, then no question of paying compensation would arise, whether the taking assumed one form or another. acquisition of property or its requisition, on that construction of the article, are merely two modes of depriving a person of property and must be held to be included within the ambit of clause (1) of article 31, and clause (2) has not been drafted in the nature of an exception to the provisions of clause (1) of article 31. on this construction of clause (1) of article 31 the logical conclusion is that what has been done by this clause is that it has declared a fundamental right in the state as against an individual. such a construction of the article in part iii, in my opinion, has to be avoided, as the purpose of those articles is to declares the fundamental rights possessed by the citizens or other persons residing within the union, rather than to declare the rights of the state as against themsecondly, my learned brother was oppressed with the idea that if a wide construction was not placed on the phraseology employed in clause (1), deprivation of property by the state in cases of emergency, for instance, in order to prevent a fire from spreading, would also have to be paid for. it seems that in that case pointed attention was not drawn during arguments to the comprehensive provisions of the saving clause of the article which seems fully to cover cases of that kind. the constitution makers were fully alive to cases of that character and considering that all such cases, unless excepted would fall within the mischief of clause (2), they purposely excepted them from the ambit of the clause
the majority of the court in chiranjit lal chowdhuri's case refrained from expressing any opinion on the scope of article 31(1). my brother mukharjea made a reference to this question but declined to express any opinion on it. there is thus no consensus of opinion on the scope of the provisions of clause (1) of article 31 in this court and no final opinion has been pronounced upon it so far
for the proposition that the expression "acquisition" has the concept of vesting of title in the state reliance was placed on the opinion of latham c.j. in minister of state for the army v. dalziel. by virtue of the provisions of section 51, placitum (xxxi) of the constitution of australia, the commonwealth parliament is empowered to make law with respect to
general regulations styled as the national security regulations were made under the
-1943, section 5. regulation 54 relates to the taking of possession of land by the commonwealth and other regulations provide for the ascertainment and payment of compensation for loss or damage suffered by reason of things done in pursuance of the regulation. the supreme court of new south wales held that taking possession of land in pursuance of regulation 54 amounted to acquisition of property within the meaning of section 51 (xxxi) of the constitution. on appeal latham c.j. made the following observations :
the majority of the court held otherwise and expressed the opinion that the taking under regulation 54 of the national security (general) regulations by the commonwealth for an indefinite period of the exclusive possession of property constituted an acquisition of property within the meaning of section 51 (xxxi) of the constitution. this is what rich j. said, representing the majority opinion :
in exceptional cases where the company's property is injured by outsiders, a shareholder may, under the english law, after making all endeavours to induce the persons in charge of the affairs of the company to take steps, file a suit on behalf of himself and other shareholders for redressing the wrong done to the company, but that principle does not apply here for this is not a suit, nor has it been shown that any attempt was made by the petitioner to induce the old directors to take steps nor do these proceedings purport to have been taken by the petitioner on behalf of himself and the other shareholders of the company.
whatever validity the argument may have in relation to the petitioner's claim based on the alleged invasion of his right of property under article 31, there can be little doubt that, so far as his claim based on the contravention of article 14 is concerned, the petitioner is entitled to relief in his own right.
and again at page 899 :
" the rights that could be enforced under article 32 must ordinarily be the rights of the petitioner himself who complains of infraction of such rights and approaches the court for relief. this being the position, proper subject of our investigation would be what rights, if any, of the petitioner as a shareholder of the company have been violated by the impugned legislation. a discussion of the fundamental rights of the company as such would be outside the purview of our enquiry.
the company and the shareholders are in law separate entities, and if the allegation is made that any property belonging to the company has been taken possession of without compensation or the right enjoyed by the company under article 19(1)(f) has been infringed, it would be for the company to come forward to assert or vindicate its own rights and not for any individual shareholder to do so.
in my opinion, although a shareholder may, in a sense, be interested to see that the company of which he is a shareholder is not deprived of its property he cannot, as held in darnell v. indiana, be heard to complain, in his own name and on his own behalf, of the infringement of the fundamental right to property of the company, for, in law, his own right to property has not been infringed as she is not the owner of the company's properties.
in this view of the matter there is great force in the argument that the property of the company has been taken possession of by the state through directors who have been appointed by the state in exercise of the powers conferred by the ordinance and the act and who are under the direction and control of the state and this has been done without payment of any compensation.
here, therefore, it may well be argued that the property of the company having been taken possession of by the state in exercise of powers conferred by a law which does not provide for payment of any compensation, the fundamental right of the company has, in the eye of the law, been infringed."
it is quite clear that although i used the words" there is great force in the argument"and" it may well be argued
an act to make special provision for the proper management and administration of the sholapur spinning and weaving company limited.
social control"," eminent domain
ghulam hasan j. - i have had the advantage of pursing the judgment of my learned brother mr. justice mahajan and i agree with his conclusion that the appeal should be allowed and the plaintiff's suit decreed with costs. i would like to add a few words
this appeal raises the question of the constitutional validity of the sholapur spinning and weaving company (emergency provisions) ordinance (ii of 1950), subsequently replaced by act xxviii of 1950, which reproduced substantially the same provisions. this question arose originally upon a petition under article 32 of the constitution filed by one chiranjit lal chowdhuri, an ordinary shareholder of the company, challenging the act as being in violation of his fundamental rights under articles 14, 19 and 31 of the
. by a majority of 3 : 2 it was held that the petitioner had failed to displace the presumption of the constitutionality of the act or that there had been any abridgment of his fundamental rights. the minority declared the impugned act as void as it violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner under article 14 of the
my learned brother has distinguished, and if i may say so with respect, successfully, the decision in chiranjit lal's case and has explained the ratio disdained of the majority view in that case and i entirely agree with him. that decision does not, in my opinion, conclude the matter so far as the present case is concerned and no question of invoking the principle of stare decisis arisesthe question which we are now invited to consider was raised by the appellant, a preference shareholder holding 3, 244 preference shares of the face value of rs. 100 out of which he had paid up rs. 50 per share. he was called upon by the statutory directors nominated by the government under the impugned act to pay rs. 1, 62, 000 as the balance of the amount of the call. thereupon he filed the suit in a representative capacity on behalf of himself and other preference shareholders challenging the validity of the act. the suit was dismissed by the trial judge whose decision was affirmed on appeal by the division bench of the bombay high court
my learned brother has analysed in detail the relevant provisions of the impugned act and i have no hesitation in agreeing with him that the act in substance robs the company of every vestige of right except what has been laconically called the husk of title. i agree, therefore, that the impugned act oversteps the constitutional limits of the power conferred upon the state and offends against the provisions of article 31 and must, therefore, be held void
