the judgment was delivered by : bose
bose j. : this judgment will govern civil appeals nos. 146 and 147 of 1952 (these seem to be appeals from
. the writs have been granted and the state of bombay appeals.
the governor of bombay, acting through the assistant controller of accommodation, issued orders under section 6(4)(a) of the
.
4. the act of 1948 would have expired in april 1950 but its life was extended by bombay act ii of 1950. later, sections 5 and 6 were amended by bombay act xxxix of 1950. as the later acts were after the
and as the life of the main act was extended after the
came into form, it is said that they are all hit by articles 19 (1)(f) and 31(2), firstly, because the restrictions imposed on the right to hold, acquire and dispose of property are neither reasonable nor in the interests of the general public and, secondly, because the act does not require that there should be a public purpose.
5. we will first deal with civil appeals nos. 145 and 146 of 1952 where tenants and licensees are concerned.
6. in our opinion, article 19(1) (f) does not apply to them. in 'state of west bengal v. subodh gopal bose',
in our opinion, this was decided in principle in - 'gopalan v. state of madras',
7. it was argued as against this that this rule can only apply when there is a total deprivation of property and article 19(l)(f) cannot be excluded if there is the slightest vestige of a right on which the article can operate. this has also been answered in substance in '
as was said by one of us in -'
.
9. the main act is pre-constitution and at that time there were no. fundamental rights, accordingly it is understandable that the act as then framed did not require or specify a public purpose but despite that it did say, in the preamble. "
and sections 5 and 6 as now amended contain the words
" for the purpose of the state or any other public purpose?
it is unnecessary to state in express terms in the statute itself the precise purpose for, which property is being taken, provided from the whole tenor and intendment of the act it could be gathered that the property was being acquired either for purposes of the state or for purposes of the public and that the intention was to benefit the community at large
whereas, on inquiry, it is found that the premises specified below had become vacant on /or after - the month of may 1950.
now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 6 of the
(bom. xxxiii of 1948) the government of bombay is pleased to requisition the said premises etc.
in continuation of the order dated etc. ...... the government of bombay is pleased to declare that the premises mentioned in that order were requisitioned for a public purpose, namely housing a person having no. housing accommodation on the date of the said order cited above.
the policy of the government was that having regard to the fact that but for such intimation a vacancy would not have come to light at all, it was fair and just and conducive to an equitable distribution of accommodation that the premises should be allotted to the first informant provided he genuinely needs accommodation."
it was contended, and the contention prevailed in the high court, that a decision to set apart a section of the much needed vacancies for the use of spies and informers as a reward for their services, whether their need was as great as that of other houseless persons or not, was not equitable, and as the purpose of the legislation was said to be the equitable distribution of vacant accommodation this fell outside its scope.
19. in civil appeal no. 146 of 1951 a further question arises. under the act only premises (to which a special meanings is given, within the meaning of section 4 (3) can be requisitioned. it was urged that the premises in this case were not premises within the meaning of that definition, so it was said they could not be requisitioned. the question turns on whether the premises were "let" or "intended to be let". the learned trial judge threw the burden of proof on the state government and told its learned counsel that he should proceed to prove this fact if he so desired. he replied that he did not intend to lead any evidence.
it was explained to us that government took up this attitude as it wanted a decision about where the burden lay as the question arises continually and cannot be decided when both parties adduce evidence. the learned attorney general gave an assurance that the possession of the petitioners in this case would not be disturbed; all he wanted was a decision on the point. in the absence of any counter evidence the learned trial judge accepted the facts proved by the petitioners' affidavit and decided the matter in their favour.
20. on appeal the learned chief justice of the bombay high court and bhagwati, j. upheld the view of the learned trial judge tendolkar, j. in our opinion, the burdan was wrongly placed. the petitioners came to court with the allegation that government had passed an illegal order against them. on the face of it, the order is not illegal. government has authority under the law to make such orders, and 'prima facie' the order complies with the provisions of the statute. it was therefore the duty of the petitioners to show that the order was illegal. this is particularly so here as the question whether the petitioners has let or had intended to let the building or a part of it was a matter on which they had special means of knowledge. however, in view of the learned attorney general's assurance there is no. need to go into this matter any further. this appeal will accordingly be dismissed because of the assurance given and here will be no. order about costs thought.
21. in civil appeal no. 147 of 1952, the order of requisition was under section 5(1) but the same questions arise. as in the other two cases, no. public purpose is mentioned and, as before, a second order setting out the purpose, housing a person without accommodation, was made in august 1951. for the reasons already given, we hold that there was a public purpose and that the orders here were valid.
22. the only other question, namely, whether a 'mandamus' can issue now, becomes unnecessary. civil appeals nos. 145 and 147 of 1952 are allowed and the petitions in these two cases will be dismissed but here also there will be no. order about costs throughout.
23. civil appeal no. 146 of 1952 will be dismissed because of the undertaking given by the learned attorney general, and the order of the high court will stand. in view of this we need not decide whether a 'mandamus' can or should have been issued. as we have said, this appeal will be dismissed but there will be no. order about costs.
