the judgment was delivered by sinha j. :
sinha j. for the this is an appeal by special leave against the orders of the lucknow bench of the labour appellate tribunal of india (hereinafter to be referred to as "the appellate tribunal") dated the 31st august 1953, setting aside the award dated the 13th october, 1952 made by the chairman, central government industrial tribunal, calcutta (hereinafter to be referred to as "the tribunal") reinstating the appellant as the head cashier with back salary under the punjab national bank (hereinafter called "the bank").
the facts leading up to this appeal may shortly be stated. the appellant started his service as the head cashier in the una branch of the bank on the 18th june 1949. the cash department of the bank is in charge of treasurers. the relation between the bank and the treasurers is evidenced by an agreement dated the 1st may 1944 (ex. 1) which will be noticed in detail hereinafter. that was an agreement between the bank and "messrs rai bahadur karam chand puri &amp; bros". that firm was appointed the treasurers at the head office of the bank and other places in and outside the punjab. on the 28th september 1951 the district manager of the northern circle of the bank wrote a letter (ex. 4) to the treasurers informing them that it had been decided to close the una office of the bank with effect from the close of business on the 3rd november 1951. in pursuance of that letter the treasurers intimated by a letter dated 2nd october 1951 enclosing a copy of ex. 4 to the appellant that the una branch of the bank will cease to function from the close of business on the 3rd november 1951 and that his services will not be required after that date. the punjab national bank employees&amp;' union (punjab) took up the cause of the appellant as also that of other employees and made representations to the government of india. the government of india by a notification no. sro-432 dated the 8th march 1952 published in the gazette of india, part ii - sec. 3, in exercise of its powers under section 10 of the
(hereinafter called the act) referred the industrial dispute between the bank and its workmen named in schedule 2 (concerning workers dismissed) and schedule 3 (relating to workers transferred) for adjudication to the industrial tribunal at calcutta constituted under section 7 of the act. schedule 1 in so far as it is necessary for purposes of this case contains the following points of dispute between the employer and the workmen :-
2. in the event of any order for reinstatement payment of wages and other allowances from the date of dismissal to the date of reinstatement
on merits the main point involved is as to whether the services of an employee of the cash department can be terminated on a change made in the services of the contractor cashier".
it answered this point in these words :-
it is true that the defendants selected the man and paid his wages, and these are circumstances which, if nothing else intervened, would be strong to show that he was the servant of the defendants. so, indeed, he was as to a great many things; but as to the working of the crane he was no longer their servant, but bound to work under the orders of jones &amp; co., and, if they saw the man misconducting himself in working the crane or disobeying their orders, they would have a right to discharge him from that employment
many reported cases were cited to your lordships but where, as all agree, the question in each case turns on its own circumstances, decisions in other cases are rather illustrative than determinative. so far as attempts have been made to formulate a criterion of general application, it cannot be said that these attempts have been vary successful
