the judgment was delivered by subba rao j. :
the material facts are not in dispute and may be briefly stated : the dispute relates to a land measuring 179 kanals and 2 marlas, situate in village wanderjatana. on august 26, 1949, defendants 3 to 7 sold the said land to defendants 1 and 2 for a consideration of rs. 37, 611. on august 26, 1950, defendants 8 to 11 instituted a suit, suit no. 231 of 1950 (exhibit p. 26/1) in the court of the subordinate judge, ii class, faridkot, to pre-empt the said sale on the ground, among others, that they had a right of pre-emption. on january 6, 1951, the vendees, i.e., defendants 1 and 2, and the plaintiffs therein, i.e., defendants 8 to 11 (appellants in the present appeal), entered into a compromise. under the terms of the compromise, the vendees admitted that they had received rs. 1, 700 from defendants 8 to 11 and that defendants 8 to 11 agreed to pay the balance of the consideration, amounting to rs. 35, 911 on the 27th april, 1951. it was further agreed that on the payment of the said amount, they should get possession through court. as the amount agreed to be paid was in excess of the pecuniary jurisdiction of the court of the subordinate judge, they filed the compromise deed in the court of the district judge and on the basis of the said compromise, the district judge made a decree dated january 23, 1951. it was provided in the decree that in case defendants 8 to 11 failed to pay the balance to the vendees on april 27, 1951, the suit should stand dismissed and that if the said balance was paid on that date, the vendees should deliver possession of the land in dispute to them. defendants 8 to 11 deposited the balance of rs. 35, 911 on april 23, 1951, and got possession of the land on may 17, 1951.before the said defendants (8 to 11) deposited the amount of court under the terms of the compromise decree, the respondents herein, claiming to be owners of land in the same patti, filed suit no. 13 of 1951 in the court of the subordinate judge, ii class, faridkot, to enforce their right of pre-emption. to that suit the original vendors were impleaded as defendants 3 to 7, the vendees as defendants 1 and 2 and the plaintiffs in suit no. 231 of 1950 as defendants 8 to 11. defendants 8 to 11 contested the suit, inter alia, on the grounds that the plaintiffs had no right of pre-emption superior to that of theirs, that the suit was barred by limitation and that the whole of the sale consideration had been fixed in good faith and paid.
the learned subordinate judge found all the issues in favour of defendants 8 to 11 and dismissed the suit. on the main issue he found that the said defendants, by obtaining a decree for pre-emption before the rival claimants had filed their suit, had become vendees through court and so the plaintiffs could not succeed unless they had a superior right.
the plaintiffs preferred an appeal to the additional district judge, faridkot, against the said decree. the district judge held that the plaintiffs and defendants 8 to 11 had equal rights of pre-emption and were entitled to share the sale in the proportion of 3/7 and 4/7 respectively on payment of the proportionate amount of the consideration. on the main question, he took the view that defendants 8 to 11 did not exercise their right of pre-emption when the present suit was instituted for the reason that by the date of the filing of the suit they had not deposited the purchase money in court. both the parties filed second appeals against the decision of the district judge in the high court of patiala questioning that part of the decree which went against them. the high court upheld that part of the decree of the learned district judge holding that the plaintiffs were entitled to a share in the suit property but remanded the suit to the district judge to give his findings on the following two questions : (1) what was the amount paid by defendants 8 to 11 to the original vendees and whether they paid it in good faith; (2) whether the case would come under section 17c, cl. (e) of the punjab pre-emption act (hereinafter to be referred to as the act). as the high court refused to certify that the case was a fit one for appeal to the supreme court, defendants 8 to 11 preferred the above appeal by obtaining special leave of this court.the learned for the appellants raises the following two contentions before us : (1) section 28 of the pre-emption act indicates that a property can be divided between equal pre-emptors in terms of section 17 of the pre-emption act only when both the suits are pending before the court at the time of the passing of the decree; (2) the appellants exercised their right of pre-emption by obtaining a decree or at any rate when they deposited the money payable under the decree and thereby got themselves substituted in place of the original vendees and thereafter, the plaintiffs can succeed only by proving their superior right to them. the learned counsel for the respondents countered the aforesaid argument by stating that the plaintiffs, being pre-emptors of equal degree, have got a statutory right under section 17 of the pre-emption act to share the land with the appellants, and the appellants, having been substituted in place of the original vendees pendente lite, are hit by the doctrine of lis pendens and therefore, they cannot claim higher rights than those possessed by the original vendees at the time of the filing of the suit.
before attempting to give a satisfactory answer to the question raised, it would be convenient at the outset to notice and define the material incidents of the right of pre-emption. a concise but lucid statement of the law is given by plowden j. in dhani nath v. budhu (136 p.r. 1894 at p. 511) thus :
the aforesaid passage indicates that a pre-emptor has two rights : (1) inherent or primary right, i.e., a right to the offer of a thing about to be sold and (2) secondary or remedial right to follow the thing sold.
mahmood j. in his classic judgment in gobind dayal v. inayatullah ([1885] i.l.r.
the doctrine adumbrated by the learned judge, namely, the secondary right of pre-emption is simply a right of substitution in place of the original vendee, has been accepted and followed by subsequent decisions.
section 4 :
