the judgment was delivered by sinha, c.j
the facts of this case are short and simple. the respondent was appointed as a temporary sub-deputy collector in the year 1944. in 1946, he was vested with the powers of a magistrate of the first class. in december, 1947, he was appointed to a substantive post in the bihar subordinate civil service, on probation. during the period of his probation, he was posted at jamshedpur in the district of singhbhum, and later at nawada in the district of gaya. proceedings were taken against him and he was called upon to show cause why his services should not be terminated forthwith, by the government letter dated 4 november, 1952, a copy of which was forwarded to the respondent through the district magistrate, gaya. in that letter it was stated that throughout the year 1948 and upon the end of may 1949 the respondent, while employed as a sub-deputy magistrate at jamshedpur, had earned notoriety for corrupt practices, that from may, 1949 to march, 1951, the respondent's reputation while posted at nawada, continued to be bad, and that his judicial work while at jamshedpur had been subjected to careful scrutiny by government, leading "to discovery of incredibly perverse decisions" given by him. instances of eight cases with all the necessary details were also recited therein. those proceedings terminated in an order of the government of bihar, dated 23 july, 1953, the relevant portions of which are as follows :-
the respondent moved the high court of judicature at patna under arts. 226 and 227 of the constitution against the order of the government quoted above. the matter was heard by v. ramaswami, j. (as he then was) and k. sahai, j. the high court by its judgment dated 19 january, 1955 allowed the application and quashed the order aforesaid of the government dated 23 july, 1953. ramaswami, j., with all the contentions raised on behalf of the respondent-petitioner in the high court - and after examining the relevant, rules of the civil services (classification control and appeal) rules and art. 311(2) of the constitution, came to the conclusion that the respondent was not entitled to a full enquiry as contemplated by the para. 1 of rule 55 of the civil service (classification, control and appeal) rules, but that he was entitled to the protection under art. 311(2) of the constitution. he also held that there had been a violation of the principles of natural justice, inasmuch as the special reports of the commissioner of chotanagpur division and of the deputy inspector-general of police in the criminal investigation department, had not been shown to the respondent. on these grounds he held that the order of discharge impugned by the respondent was illegal and ultra vires. sahai, j., did not express a decided opinion on the question whether the respondent was entitled to the protection of art. 311(2) of the constitution, because in his view the decision of the judicial committee of the privy council in i. m. lall case [l.r. 75 i.a. 225] was concerned with a confirmed officer, whereas the respondent was only an officer on probation. but he agreed with ramaswami, j., in the result on the ground of the violation of the principles of natural justice.the state of bihar moved the high court for leave to appeal to this court. the application for leave under art. 132(1) of the constitution was heard by s. k. das, c.j. (as the then was) and kanhaiya singh, j. the high court, by its order dated 8 august, 1955, refused to grant the leave on the ground that the case had not really been determined on an interpretation of art. 311 of the constitution, but substantially on the ground that there had been an infringement of the principles of natural justice. the state of bihar thereafter moved this court for special leave to appeal, which was granted on 28 november, 1955. that is how the matter had come before this court.
the main point in controversy before us turns on the question whether the provisions of art. 311(2) of the constitution are attracted to the case of a public servant who was still a probationer and had not been confirmed in a substantive post. the question whether there had or had not been a violation of the principles of natural justice, which was the basis of the decision in the high court as indicated above, was not raised before us. the judgment of the high court could be allowed to rest on that basis alone, but as it appears that this court granted special leave to determine the controversy based upon the interpretation of art. 311(2) of the constitution, we think it necessary to express our opinion on that part of the case. the decision of this court in parshotam lal dhingra v. union of india
it would thus appear that, in the instant case, thought the respondent was only a probationer he was discharged from service really because the government had on enquiry come to the conclusion, rightly or wrongly, that he was unsuitable for the post he held on probation. this was clearly by way of punishment and, therefore, he was entitled to the protection of art. 311(2) of the constitution. it was argued on behalf of the appellant that the respondent, being a mere probationer, could be discharged without any enquiry into his conduct being made and his discharge could not mean any punishment to him, because he had no right to a post. it is true, if the government came to the conclusion that the respondent was not a fit and proper person to hold a post in the public service of the state, it could discharge him without holding any enquiry into his alleged misconduct. if the government proceeded against him in that direct way, without casting any aspersion on his honesty or competance, his discharge would not, in law, have the effect of a removal from service by way of punishment and he would, therefore, have no grievance to ventilate in any court. instead of taking that easy course, the government chose the more difficult one of starting proceedings against him and of branding him as a dishonest and an incompetent officer. he had the right, in those circumstances, to insist upon the protection of art. 311 (2) of the constitution. that protection not having been given to him, he had the right to seek his redress in court. it must, therefore, be held that the respondent had been wrongly deprived of the protection afforded by art. 311(2) of the constitution. his removal from the service, therefore, was not in accordance with the requirements of the constitution.the appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.
