the judgment was delivered by hidayatullah j. :
hidayatullah j. for the this appeal with a certificate from the former high court of saurashtra under art. 133 of the constitution read with ss. 109 and 110 of the
, has been brought against the judgment of that court dated february 19, 1953, in civil first appeal no. 16 of 1952.
the appellant is the state of saurashtra, which stood substituted for the state of junagadh, against which the suit was originally filed. the respondent, memon haji ismail haji valimahomed of junagadh, (hereinafter referred to as the respondent), brought this suit originally against two defendants, the state of junagadh and one jamadar abu umar bin abdulla abu panch (hereafter referred to as abu panch), for a declaration that the secretariat order no. 2/3289 dated october 1, 1948, was "illegal, unjust and against all canons of natural justice." he also asked for an alternative relief that the second defendant do return to him a sum of rs. 30, 000 plus rs. 541-2-0, being the consideration and expenses of a transfer of immovable property resumed under the said order. the suit was decreed by the civil judge, to whom after integration the case was transferred, and the decree was confirmed by the high court by the judgment under appeal. it may be pointed out that during the course of this suit, a third defendant, namely, the mamlatdar, viswadar was also impleaded, because the property of abu panch had passed into the management of the saurashtra government under what is described in the case as the gharkhod ordinance. it may further be pointed out that the two defendants other than the state of saurashtra were discharged from the suit, and it proceeded only against the state of saurashtra for the relief of declaration above described.the facts of the case are as follows : one ameer ismail khokhar kayam khokhar purchased a plot of land in junagadh town from the state of junagadh, and built a house on it. a rukka was issued to him on december 2, 1939, which is plaintiff's exhibit no. 34. in the year 1941, the nawab of junagadh purchased the property from khokhar, though the document by which this purchase took place has not been produced in the case. on november 17, 1941, the nawab gave this property by gift to abu panch. abu panch in his turn sold on november 24, 1943 the property to the respondent for rs. 30, 000. in the original gift deed (described in plaintiff's exhibit dated may 18, 1942) there does not appear to have been any mention of a power to transfer the property. indeed, in the said document of may 18, 1942, it was stated that the house was given for the "use and enjoyment" of abu panch. subsequently, on february 12, 1944, the nawab ordered certain amendments in the palace order by making it possible for abu panch to sell the house. it was stated as follows :
it appears that this additional shera was issued to validate the sale which had been effected by abu panch earlier. however, the matters stood thus when after independence the affairs of junagadh state fell into chaos, and at the invitation of the state council the the government of india ordered the regional commissioner, western india and gujarat states region to assume charge of the administration of the state on behalf of the government of india. the regional commissioner on november 9, 1947, issued a proclamation which was published in the destural amal sarkar junagadh of november 10, 1947, stating that he had assumed charge of the administration of the junagadh state at 18.00 hours under the orders of the government of india. the proclamation which is brief, may be quoted here :
on november 14, 1947, the regional commissioner by a notification (no. 6 of 1947), appointed shri s. w. shiveshwarkar as administrator of junagadh state. that notification was as follows :
on october 13, 1948, shri shiveshwarkar passed secretariat order no. r/3289 of 1948, which was impugned in the suit. it reads :
) filed the suit for the above declaration in the high court of the state. as pointed out above, the suit was transferred subsequently to the civil judge, senior division, junagadh, who decreed it granting the declaration on december 15, 1951. he held that the administrator's order was illegal and inoperative and also against "all canons of natural justice." an appeal was filed by the state of saurashtra pleading, as was done in the suit itself, that the action of shri shiveshwarkar who was a delegate of the government of india appointed under s. 3(2) of the extra-provincial jurisdiction act, was not justiciable being an act of state, that the civil court's jurisdiction was barred under s. 5 of the extra provincial jurisdiction act and s. 4(2) of ordinance no. 72 of 1949 and that the grant was always resumable by the ruler and shri shiveshwarkar as the successor could also resume the same.the high court of saurashtra referred in detail to a minute prepared by sir raymond west in col. webb's political practice, wherein the author had stated the rights of rulers were to resume grants made by them and stated that such resumption was not possibly by the rulers. the high court also stated this action could not be regarded as an act of state and further that the jurisdiction of the courts was neither barred by s. 5 of the extra-provincial jurisdiction act nor by s. 4(2) of ordinance no. 72 of 1949.
in this appeal, the learned solicitor-general on behalf of the state of saurashtra abandoned three of the contentions which were raised in the courts below. he said that the state was not relying upon the power of shri shiveshwarkar as successor to the ruler of junagadh to resume this property, and no reference to sir raymond west's minute was therefore necessary. he also said that state government did not seek to justify the resumption nor question the jurisdiction of the court under the extra-provincial jurisdiction act and the above-mentioned ordinance. he pleaded that the action of shri shiveshwarkar was an act of state performed on behalf of the government of india, and was therefore not justiciable in municipal courts.
the question thus is always : did the state or its agents purport to act 'catastrophically' or subject to the ordinary course of the law ? this question was posed in secretary of state in council for india v. kamachee boye sahaba [(1859) 13 moore p.c. 22] by lord kingsdown in these words :-
in that case the supreme court of madras was moved by a bill to claim certain properties seized on the death of raja sivaji of tanjore without heirs. the claim was accepted by the supreme court of madras but was rejected by the privy council. lord kingsdown observed in the case :-
after deciding that there was an act of state, lord kingsdown further observed :
similar view was expressed also in raja of coorg v. east india company [(1860) 29 beav. 300], raja saligram v. secretary of state for india in council [(1872) l.r. ind. app. suppl. vol. 119] and sardar bhagwan singh v. secretary of state [(1874) l.r. 2 a.i. cas. 38], and secretary of state v. sardar rustam khan [(1941) l.r. 68 i.a. 109]. the principle of these cases has been extended to all new territories whether acquired by conquest or annexation or cession or otherwise and also to rights, contracts, concessions, immunities and privileges erected by the previous paramount power. these are held to be not binding on the succeeding power even though before annexation it was agreed between the two powers, that they would be respected. lord dunedin in vaje singh ji joravar singh &amp; others v. secretary of state for india [(1924) l.r. 51 i.a. 357, 360] summed up the law in these words :-
these cases and others like cook v. sprigg [
it is, however, otherwise if the act of the new sovereign is meant to be within the law and is not concomitant of an act of state. one such case was forester and others v. secretary of state for india [18 w.r. 349 p.c.]. in that case one of the questions was whether there was an act of state at all, a question which the courts can legitimately consider. it was held that the begum, whose estate was seized by the east india company after her death, was not a sovereign princess but a mere jaidadar and the resumption of her jagir upon her death was not an act of state but an act done under a legal title. it was observed :-
we have now to consider whether the necessary facts to support the plea in defence existed in this case. we must determine what was the status of the respondents on the date the impugned order was passed against him. the position of the ex-rulers of the former indian states has, on more than one occasion, been analysed by this court and need not detain us for long. after the lapse of paramountcy by reason of s. 7 of the indian independence act 1947, the nawab of junagadh became a sovereign but he did not accede to the new dominion by executing an instrument of accession as did the other rulers in saurashtra. he left the country. the position of junagadh was thus unique and what subsequently happened is described in the white paper on indian states which it has become customary to rely upon as a constitutional document, without proof.
it would appear from this that between november 9, 1947 at and january 20, 1949, there was no formal annexation of the state by the dominion of india, though the central government through its regional commissioner, western india and gujrat states region was maintaining law and order and carrying on the administration. on november 16, 1947, the following notification was issued by the administrator;-
from that date the administration of the junagadh state was centered in the administrator as the agent of the dominion of india. the people of junagadh did not, strictly speaking, become the citizens of the dominion till much later. during the interval they were aliens even though they desired union with india and had expressed themselves almost unanimously in the referendum.
the act of the dominion in thus assuming the administration of the junagadh state was an act of state pure and simple and the action of the administrator was taken before the act of state was over.
the respondent contended before us that the theory of an act of state did not apply to this case according to him the state council was in existence and had invited the dominion of india to step in and all the local laws were still applicable. he pointed our that the saurashtra
was amended by a notification on 7th july, 1948, and that also proved that the local laws were in force and the administrator was subject to them in his dealings with private property, under the general superintendence of the regional commissioner. all this is beside the point and does not truly interpret the act of state which had taken place. the essence of an act of state is the exercise of sovereign power and that is done arbitrarily, on principles either outside or paramount to the municipal law. the fact that the sovereign allows the inhabitants to retain their old laws and customs does not make the sovereign subject to them and all rights under those laws are held at the pleasure of the sovereign. it is only when the sovereign can be said to have purported to act within the laws that the act of state ceases to afford a plea in defence. before that stage is reached, government may be influenced by the existing laws and right and obligations but is not governed or bound by them. see campbell v. hall, [1 comp. 204; 98 e.r. 1045], ruding v. smith [2 hag. con. 384; 161 e.r. 774] two cases of conquest and e.i. co. v. syed ali [7 m.i.a. 555 at 578]. see also mayne criminal law of india (4th edition) ii pp. 119, 120 where the law is summarised. there is nothing to prove that the dominion had expressly or even tacitly recognized the old rights, the burden of proving which lay upon the respondent secretary of state for india v. bai rajbai [l.r. 42 i.a. 229] and vajesingh's case [(1924) l.r. 51 j.a. 357, 360] (op. cit.).in this view of the matter it is not necessary to determine whether the nawab could or did confer title on the donee in respect of this property. equally fruitless will be an inquiry into the powers of the nawab to resume or derogate from, his grants and whether similar or identical powers were inherited by the dominion government or its agents. the action of the dominion government being an act of state, the act of the administrator, however arbitrary, was not justiciable in the municipal courts and the suit was not well founded.
the appeal is, therefore, allowed. the respondent's suit shall be dismissed with costs throughout.
