the judgment was delivered by ayyangar, j. :
which was enacted on august 26, 1960 as an amendment to the parent act (act x of 1949). the appellant before this court is the all india bank employee&amp;'s association which is a trade union organization of bank employees of several banks operating in india. the punjab national bank employee&amp;'s union, which is a trade union with similar objects has been permitted to intervene in this appeal in support of the appellant union. the three other writ petitions are by other bank employees&amp;' unions whose description would be apparent from the cause title and all these cases have been heard together because in the writ petitions also the point raised is identical, viz., the validity of section 34a of the banking companies act, which will be referred to hereafter as the impugned provision.
.
before commencing the examination of the points in controversy and the grounds on which the legality of the above provision is impugned. it would be helpful for a better appreciation of the problem if we set out, in very brief outline, the history of the steps which led to the enactment in dispute. there was a long standing practice in england of banking companies, as distinguished from companies carrying on other commercial etc. activities, not to disclose, in their balance sheets and profit &amp; loss accounts, bad and doubtful debts and the provision made therefore, as well as the secret reserves created and held under various items - a practice which received judicial recognition by buckley, l. j. in newton v. birmingham small arms co., ltd. (
drew no distinction between the contents of balance sheets of banking-companies as distinguished from those of other companies and both were required to disclose a list of debts owing to the concern which were considered bad or doubtful. provisions on the same lines, i. e., without any distinction between banking and other companies, were copied and continued by the
. when, however, the
was enacted, form &amp;'f&amp;' to the 3rd schedule to the act contained a note in respect of the sub-heading &amp;'book debts&amp;' under the head &amp;'property &amp; assets&amp;' in the balance sheet, reading :
.
it would be seen that by reason of this note the obligations imposed upon banks as regards the classification of their assets and the information to be disclosed became slightly more detailed that in the case of other companies. the practice, however, of bankers to which we adverted earlier not to disclose or not to disclose to the full extent, bad and doubtful debts but to make provision for them by setting aside under other heads, sufficient moneys which would operate as secret reserves, so that the credit of the institution would not be affected while its financial stability would remain unimpaired, was continued notwithstanding this change in the form. the central bank of india limited in its published balance-sheets of the year 1925 adopted the above practice which, however, was not obviously in strict conformity with the requirements of form &amp;'f&amp;' to the third schedule read with the note. the managing-director of the bank was prosecuted by one shamdasani who was a shareholder of the bank for
 "filing and publishing statements which were false in material particulars", an offence punishable under section 282 of the indian companies act. the magistrate acquitted the accused on the ground that the balance-sheet was in accordance with the usual practice of bankers and that the reserves of the company which were shown under various heads though not as a specific provision for bad and doubtful debts covered the possible losses several times. an application for revision was filed before the high court of bombay and fawcett, j. allowed it holding that
. this judgment was rendered on february 28, 1927 (vide shamdasani v. pochkanwala
amending form &amp;'f&amp;' and as amended banks were excluded from the requirement of disclosing the reserve for bad and doubtful debts under the heading &amp;'capital and liabilities&amp;' in the left hand side of the balance-sheet, and in the right-hand column
, were not required to be shown as part of the property and assets of a bank.the provisions of the
underwent numerous changes by the amending act of 1936 which included inter alia one whereby the change effected by the notification, dated march 29, 1927, in form &amp;'f&amp;' were omitted and form &amp;'f&amp;' was made to retain the note which accompanied it under the act of 1913 without the exception in favour of banks effected by the notification. this was possibly unintended, because on the day after the amending act came into operation, the central government published a notification on january 16, 1937 again under section 151 of the companies act restoring the alterations in the balance-sheet form &amp;'f&amp;' as had been effected by the prior notification of march 1927. the validity of this notifications was questioned as being beyond the powers of the central government by shamdasani who filed a complaint against the central bank of india limited and its directors charging them with having issued a false balance-sheet for the year ending december 31, 1939, a balance-sheet which was in conformity with the form as modified by the notification. the magistrate upheld the validity of the notification and acquitted the accused. shamdasani preferred a revision to the high court and a full bench of the bombay high court held that the notification was beyond the powers of the central government, though the order of acquittal was affirmed upholding the plea of the accused that their act was bona fide in that they believed the alteration in the form to be valid (vide shamdasani v. the central bank of india ltd. (i. l. r.
.
the committee made number of recommendations several of which were adopted in the u. k.
, and those relevant to the point under discussion served to bring the law as to the contents of a balance-sheet of a banking company into line with the practice of sound and well managed banks. in india, special legislation in relation to banking companies embodying several of these recommendations was enacted in the shape of the
(act x of 1949). section 29 of the act laid down the law in regard to requirements of the contents of the balance-sheets of banks. the balance-sheet and profit &amp; loss account were to be in the form set out in the 3rd schedule to that and sub-section (3) of that section exempted banking companies from the requirements of conforming to the form of balance-sheet and profit &amp; loss account of companies registered under the indian companies act; and the central government were empowered by sub-section (4) to amend the form set out in the schedule by notifications published in the official gazette. in form &amp;'a&amp;' which provided the model of a balance-sheet and profit &amp; loss account in the case of banks, there was not much change as compared to the requirements of the previous law except that in the profit &amp; loss account (form &amp;'b&amp;' of the third schedule) the provision for bad and doubtful debts was permitted to be excluded from the income so that the amount of bad and doubtful debts did not figure separately on the income side of the profit &amp; loss account. the income as required to be shown was "income (less provision made during the year for bad and doubtful debts)". this last item was modified by a notification issued under the power conferred by section 29(4) of the act in december 1951, so that after amendment the heading "income" in the profit &amp; loss account ran :
). thus so far as shareholders of banks and the general public including the customers of the bank were concerned, banks were relieved from the obligation of disclosing the entirety of their reserves as such and also of the extent of bad or doubtful debts and the provision made therefor.while the law was in this state disputes arose between the employees of banks all over india and the respective banks with regard to wages, conditions of work etc. which were referred by the central government in june 1949 to an ad hoc tribunal with shri k. c. sen, a retired judge of the bombay high court as chairman. the tribunal passed an award but its validity was successfully challenged in this court in april 1951 on the ground that all the members of the tribunal who passed the award were not those who had all inquired into the dispute. thereafter a fresh tribunal was appointed in january 1952 with shri s. panchapagesa sastri, a retired judge of the high court of madras as chairman. the award of this tribunal was published in april, 1953, but it is not necessary to state its terms. appeals against the award were preferred to the labour appellate tribunal both by the banks as well as by workmen. the appellate tribunal which heard the appeal consisted of three members with shri jeejeebhoy as president.
the claim of the workers in the appeal before the appellate tribunal in great part related to a demand for increased wages and salaries and the main defence of the banks was that they had not the capacity to pay anything beyond what the sastry tribunal had granted. the jeejeebhoy tribunal set out their difficulties in assessing the plea of incapacity raised by the banks in the context of the provisions of the banking companies act and the form of balance-sheet prescribed thereunder in the following terms :-
income (less provision made during the year for bad and doubtful debts and other usual or necessary provisions)
.it was the contention of the workmen that an industrial tribunal had the right in law to compel banks to disclose their secret reserves as well as the amount of "the bad and doubtful debts and other necessary provisions" which had been excluded under the head "income" in the profit &amp; loss account of banks. this matter was agitated by them before this court in state bank of india and others v. their workmen ((1959),
the disputes between the employees of banks and the managements, however, continued with the result that on march 21, 1960 the central government in exercise of the powers conferred on it by sub-section (1a) of section 10 of the industrial disputes act referred the dispute which related to several matters to the national tribunal constituted by a notification of government of the same date, k. t. desai, j. was the tribunal so appointed. most of the major banks in the country were made parties to the reference including the reserve bank and state bank of india. after the tribunal started functioning and after the parties formulated their respective contentions, applications were filed by the bank employees association on june 9, 1960, for directing the respondent-banks to produce before the tribunal for the purposes of adjudication several documents listed in the applications. among the items in respect of which production was thus sought were (1) statements showing "the secret reserves in any form" of each bank from 1954 right upto december 31, 1959; and (2) statements showing the provision made "for bad and doubtful debts and other usual and necessary provisions" during the years 1954 to 1959 and the total amounts outstanding in such items in each bank in the said years. the banks filed their reply on july 16, 1960. the production of the documents and the information called for on several of the matters including the above two was resisted by the indian banks association (being an association of employers) on the ground that they were by law exempted from disclosure in the interest of the industry and the public and claimed absolute privilege from making the disclosure.it was at this stage that the impugned provision was enacted by parliament as an amendment to the banking companies act. as several of the banks relied upon the impugned provisions in support of their plea that they could not be compelled to disclose either the quantum of their secret reserves or their nature, or as regards the provision made in the several years for "bad and doubtful debts and for other reasonable and necessary provision", the bank employees association challenged the constitutional validity of section 34a of the banking companies act, which, if valid, could have afforded a sufficient answer to the demand for production of the documents in relation to these matters. this objection was argued before the national tribunal which upheld the validity of the section. as we have stated earlier, civil appeal no. 154 is directed against and challenges the correctness of this decision. the writ petitions have been filed by bank employees associations which were not parties to the application for production before the national tribunal and are intended to support the plea of the appellant in civil appeal no. 154 of 1961.
the foregoing narrative would show that the banking companies act, as it stood before the amendment now challenged, had brought the law as to the disclosure of secret reserves and the provision for bad and doubtful debts etc. into accord with the usual practice of bankers, and had protected these items from being compulsorily disclosed to the shareholders of the respective companies and to the general public. there had been a controversy as to whether the workmen of these establishments were or were not entitled to be placed on a different position from the shareholders because of the bearing of these undisclosed items on the determination of the quantum of their wage etc. and on their conditions of work having financial implications. parliament had, by the impugned legislation, extended the protection from compulsory disclosure to the workmen as well, but with a safeguard in their case that the reserve bank would determine the amount of reserves etc. which could be taken into account in the course of industrial adjudication. the question before us is, is this attempt at some approximation of the position of the workmen to that of shareholders etc. unconstitutional ?mr. chari, learned for the appellant in civil appeal no. 154 addressed to us the main arguments in the case and these were supplemented by learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in the several writ petitions and also by learned counsel on behalf of the interveners both in the appeal as well as in the petitions. though the arguments before us ranged over a very wide field, the attack on the validity of the legislation was rested on two main grounds : (1) that the impugned legislation contravened the fundamental right guaranteed to "trade unions" by the provision contained in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 19; and (2) that it violated the freedom of equality guaranteed by article 14 of the constitution.
the right is subject to the qualification contained in clause (4), reading :
