the judgment was delivered by s. k. das, j. :
s. k. das, j. for the these four appeals which have been brought to this court on certificates granted by the then high court of saurashtra under article 133 of the constitution fall into three groups, and have been heard together. the essential facts relating to these appeals are the same, and a common question of law now falls for determination on those facts.
the state of gujarat, within whose territories the disputed properties are now situate, is the appellant in the appeals. the respondents and in some cases their ancestors, obtained grants from the then nawab of junagadh, which was then a ruling state, in respect of lands and, in one case, of a building known as 'datar manzil'. these grants were repudiated or cancelled and the property, subject of the grant, was resumed by the administrator who took over charge of the administration of junagadh on behalf of the dominion of india in 1947 in circumstances which we shall presently state. the respondents brought suits challenging the validity of the orders made by the administrator. these suits were decreed by the lower court and the decrees were substantially upheld by the high court of saurashtra. the principal point for decision in these appeals is whether the impugned orders made by the administrator arose out of and during an act of state which was not justiciable in the municipal courts. this is the only point which has been agitated before us on behalf of the appellant-state and very strong reliance has been placed on the decision of this court in the state of saurashtra v. memon haji ismail haji (
but we must first set out the essential facts which are relevant for the solution of the problem. we have already stated that the essential facts are the same in these appeals, though the facts relating to each of the grants made in favour of the respondents are different. we shall state the essential facts bearing upon the main problem and then briefly refer to the grants made in each of the cases.india attained independence in 1947. as from the 15th day of august, 1947, two independent dominions were set up known respectively as india and pakistan under the
(10 &amp; 11 geo. vi. c. 30). under section 7 of the said act, the suzerainty of his majesty over the indian states including junagadh lapsed. it released those states from all their obligations to the crown. the white paper on indian states said (at page 32) :
a process of accession was therefore begun and by august 15, 1947 all the states in the geographical limits of india barring hyderabad, kashmir and junagadh had acceded to the indian dominion. the nawab of junagadh, however, did not accede to the new dominion of india by executing an instrument of accession as did the other rulers in saurashtra. he fled the country and the affairs of junagadh state fell into disorder and chaos. at the request of the nawab's council, the government of india decided to take over the administration of the state. on november 9, 1947, the regional commissioner, western india and gujarat states region, assumed charge of the administration of the state on behalf of the government of india. a proclamation was issued on that date which said that the regional commissioner had assumed charge of the administration of the junagadh state at 18-00 hours on november 9, 1947. on november 14, 1947 the regional commissioner appointed shri s. w. shiveshwarkar as administrator of junagadh state. the administrator passed certain orders which are the orders impugned in these appeals and to which we shall presently refer, but we must first complete the general picture of political changes that took place in junagadh. in february, 1948 the government of india held a referendum
 in junagadh state to ascertain the choice of the people in regard to accession and the people voted by a large majority in favour of accession to the dominion of india. the administrator then decided with the approval of the government of india to appoint an executive council with himself as president and three other persons as members thereof. in december, 1948 the elected representatives of the people of junagadh resolved that the administration of the state be made over to the government of saurashtra and that the representatives of junagadh be enabled to participate in the constituent assembly of saurashtra state with a view to framing a common constitution for saurashtra and the junagadh state. it is necessary to state now how this integration took place. on january 23, 1948, thirty rulers of the principal states of kathiawar signed a covenant bringing into existence the united state of kathiawar (later known as the united state of saurashtra) comprising the territories of their states for the welfare of the people and entrusted to a constituent assembly the task of drawing up a democratic constitution for that state within the frame-work of the
to which they had already acceded. on that date junagadh state had no ruler nor was any covenant signed on behalf of the junagadh state. later, in december, 1948, the elected representatives of the people of junagadh, manavadar, mangrol, bantwa, babariawad and sardargarh recommended to the government of india and the government of the united state of saurashtra, as it was then called, that the administration of the states mentioned above be integrated with the united state of saurashtra. the rulers of the covenanting states thereupon entered into a supplementary covenant with the concurrence of the government of india to provide for such integration and for the participation of the elected representatives of the people of these states into the saurashtra constituent assembly. article 3 of the supplementary covenant was in these terms : (see white paper on indian states, page 249) :
.
the administration of the junagadh state was thereafter integrated with that of the united state of saurashtra on january 20, 1949. therefore, as from that date the legislative and executive authority and jurisdiction of the united state of saurashtra extended to the junagadh state to the same extent as it extended to the rest of the territories of the covenanting states.
further political changes took place after january 20, 1949, but with those changes we are not concerned in the present appeals. the two dates which are important for our purpose are november 9, 1947, when the regional commissioner first took over charge of the administration of junagadh and january 20, 1949 when junagadh merged into the united state of saurashtra.
now, as to the impugned orders made by the administrator. in civil appeal no. 349 of 1958 the ancestor of the respondents had obtained grants from the then nawab of junagadh of two villages called handla and venderwad some time between the years 1865 and 1868. a detailed history of the grants so made is not necessary for our purpose. on december 6, 1947, the administrator made the following order :
the state building situated near gadhrup wada at junagadh, was granted to khan shri abdullakanmiyan mahomedkhanmiyan, hereditarily by way of gift, under dewan daftar tharav no. 3379 dated 1st august, 1930.the said tharav is hereby cancelled and it is hereby ordered in the interest of the state that the said building along with all the superstructures thereon should be resumed and managed by the state as state property.
twenty five santis of land from the village of khokharda under vanthali mahal was granted as a gift hereditarily to mr. mohamed abdulla, son of late jamadar abdulla moosa under hazur farman no. 279 dated 30th april, 1943.
in view of the principles of alienation settlement of 1897 no grant can be wantonly favoured to anybody in contravention of the well established principles of resumption attaching to such grants.
it is hereby ordered that hazur farman no. 279 dated 30th april, 1943, is cancelled and the land in question should be resumed by the state forthwith by setting aside the settlement made thereon.
(3) whether and when a particular government is to be recognised as the government of an independent state;
