the judgment was delivered by gajendragadkar, c.j
2. the vessel "eastern saga" has 6, 631 gross registered tons, and 4, 441 net registered tons. it has an overall length of 475'.2 1/2"a breadth of 59'.3" and summer draft of 24'.7
nothing was found hidden in that space.
3. a cabin on the forecastle of the vessel was then searched and two rectangular openings in the cabin wall panelling were discovered behind a steel clothes locker which was screwed to the wall. one of these was closed with a wooden cover. they measured 5"x 13" and 5"x 5" respectively. nothing was found hidden in either of these two spaces. the cabin marked "compradores" was also searched, and when a wooden bench which was screwed to the wall panelling was removed, two rectangular holes were found in the panelling behind the bench. these holes which were covered with wooden plugs and overpainted, measured 5"x 4 1/2" and 8"x 2 1/2". nothing was found in these spaces either. the cabin of no. 1 fitter was then searched and two rectangular holes were found in the visible part of the wall panelling which had been filled in and over-painted; they were respectively 7 1/2"x 10 1/2" and 12"x 12" in size. nothing was found hidden in these spaces. that took the searching party to the sailors' accommodation where a hole measuring 2 1/2"x 5 1/2" was found in the wall panelling behind the back batton of a wooden seat which had been screwed to the wall. this hole was covered with a piece of wood and over painted. the hole opened into a space and in that space, the customs officers found a large quantity of gold in bars. further search in the sailors' accommodation led to the discovery of a hole in the wall panelling behind a steel clothes locker which was closed with a wooden plug. nothing was found in it. that is how a search was made by the customs officers on eastern saga and in one of the holes a large quantity of gold in bars was discovered.
4. on november 12, 1957 notices were served on the owners' agents at calcutta m/s. jardine henderson and co. ltd., and on the master of the vessel, captain kiunear, respectively to show cause why the vessel should not be confiscated under s. 167(12a) since it had contravened s. 52a of the act and penal action should not be taken against the agents and the master in that behalf. on the same day, a notice in similar terms was issued to kwok cho, a member of the crew of the eastern saga who had come forward to claim the gold which was discovered as a result of the search. on november 13, 1957, a further notice to show cause was served on the master in regard to another hole which had been discovered after the issue of the first notice.
5. the agents and the master thereupon sent elaborate replies setting forth their pleas that, in law, no action could be taken against them. the master pleaded that he had no knowledge of the presence of gold or unauthorised holes in the ship and had taken all reasonable precautions in accordance with the company's instructions. he fully adopted the other pleas made by the agents. the agents substantially relied on a report by m/s. norman stewart and co., marine surveyors, naval architects and consulting engineers, and urged that unless special, extensive, time-consuming and uneconomic detailed searches were carried out, it was impossible to discover special hiding places like the ones discovered on the search made by the customs authorities. they also urged that they had no knowledge about the holes or about the gold which was discovered from one of them. they referred to the statement made by kwok cho and alleged that the said statement showed that gold could be smuggled by a smuggler without the knowledge of the master and the owners of the ship. the ship moves on high-seas from place to place during the course of business, and it was impossible that the master, though in the ship, would know anything about the criminal activities of a smuggler carried on in nooks and corners of the ship, and it was inconceivable that the owners of the ship would ever know what was happening on the ship during its travel on the high-seas. they also relied on the fact that they had taken all the precautions which could be taken reasonably and had issued express and definite instructions to their crew against committing any offence like smuggling.
6. on receiving the replies sent by the agents, the master, and kwok cho, the additional collector of customs heard the appellant, and on november 23, 1957, he passed the impugned order. he held that having carefully considered the written explanations tendered and oral arguments urged before him, he was satisfied that the preventive measures taken by owners, the agents, and the master proved to be hopelessly inadequate and ineffective. he accepted their plea that they need not be regarded as persons concerned in the illegal importation of gold into india within the meaning of s. 167(8) of the act. he also upheld their plea that the openings found in the cabin of no. 1 fitter did not attract the provisions of s. 167(12a). in regard to other matters, the explanations offered appeared to him to be unsatisfactory and unacceptable. his conclusion, therefore, was that the vessel had clearly rendered itself liable to confiscation under s. 167(12a) because it had infringed the provisions of s. 52a. the quantity of gold found on the vessel was approximately of the value of rs. 23, 79, 490.80np @ rs. 109.24np per tola, and he noticed the fact that this was the recovery made in one of the several cavities found on the ship. he was, therefore, inclined to infer several holes discovered in the vessel indicating the extent to which the hiding places were used for contravening s. 52a. that is why he confiscated 1, 358 gold bars discovered as a result of the search absolutely under s. 167(8) read with s. 23a of the foreign exchange regulation act. he also imposed a personal penalty of rs. 10, 000/- on the sailor kwok cho. in regard to the ship, he directed that eastern saga be confiscated under s. 167(12a) and in lieu thereof, he gave the owners of the ship an option to pay a fine of rs. 25 lakhs which he directed should be paid within 30 days of the date of the despatch of the order, or such extended time as may be allowed. in passing this order, the additional collector observed that he had taken into consideration the fact that the agents had already suffered some loss due to the vessel's detention at the port.
7. the appellant then preferred an appeal before the central board of revenue. the board considered the matter and came to the conclusion that none of the contentions raised by the appellant was either warranted or supported by the law as it stands. the board expressed its concurrence with the conclusions of the additional collector that the offence under s. 52a of the act had been proved, and the appellant was liable to be dealt with under s. 167(12a) of the act. in regard to the grievance made by the appellant that the fine imposed by way of option was excessive, the board observed that having regard to the quantity and value of the smuggled gold and other relevant facts, it was not inclined to make any change in the said order. the penalty imposed on the master, said the board, was also not so large as to need any revision. it is not disputed that the value of the ship is very much more than the amount of rs. 25 lakhs imposed by way of fine under s. 183. this order was pronounced on may 12, 1959. the appellant's attempt to move the government of india in its revisional jurisdiction failed and its application was dismissed on december 20, 1960. the appellant then moved this court for special leave and it is with the special leave granted by this court that the resent appeal has come before us.
8. at the hearing of this appeal, the learned additional solicitor-general has urged a preliminary objection. he contends that none of the customs authorities which had dealt with the appellant's case is a tribunal under art. 136(1) of the constitution, and so the appeal preferred by the appellant is incompetent. it is true that special leave has been granted to the appellant by this court, but there can be little doubt that even in cases where special leave has been granted at the ex parte hearing of the matter on the petition of the appellant for special leave, the respondent can at the final hearing, raise a preliminary contention that special leave should not have been granted, since the decision, judgment, or order appealed against, has not been pronounced either by a court or tribunal within the meaning of art. 136(1). the additional solicitor-general argues that neither the customs collector, nor the central board of revenue, nor the central government is a tribunal, and so, special leave granted to the appellant should be revoked on that ground.
10. in maqbool hussain v. state of bombay,
12. before doing so, however, we may refer to some of the decisions which were cited at the bar on this point. in harinagar sugar mills ltd. v. shyam sunder jhunjhunwala, 1962-
(no. 1 of 1956) is a tribunal within the meaning of art. 136, or not. in dealing with this question, this court first enquired whether, while exercising its powers under s. 111 of the companies act, the central government was required to act judicially or not. the scheme of s. 111 was then analysed and it was observed that in an appeal preferred under s. 111, there was a lis or dispute between the contesting parties relating to their civil rights, and the central government was invested with the power to determine that dispute according to law. this dispute was in regard to the claim made by a transferee of a company's shares to have his transfer registered in the company's register, and the view which this court took was that when such a dispute goes before the central government under s. 111, it has to consider and decide the proposal and the objections in the light of the evidence and not on grounds of policy or expediency. that is why this court came to the conclusion that the central government was a tribunal under art. 136 of the constitution.
13. in support of the view taken on this point, this court referred to an earlier decision in shivji nathubhai v. union of india, 1960-
15. having thus broadly referred to the provisions relating to adjudication by the customs officer, we would now examine the provisions in regard to appeals and revisions made by the act. section 188 provides for an appeal against any decision or order passed by any officer of customs, and it requires that the said appeal must be filed within three months from the date of the order or decision challenged. this appeal lies to the chief customs authority, or in such cases as the central government directs, to any officer of customs not inferior in rank to a customs collector and empowered in that behalf by name or in virtue of his office by the central government. the section further provides that the appellate authority may make such enquiry and pass such order as it thinks fit, confirming, altering or annulling the decision or order under appeal. the proviso to this section makes it clear that no order passed in appeal can impose upon the person any greater confiscation, penalty or rate of duty than has been adjudged against him in the original decision or order. the section adds that every order passed in appeal shall be final, subject to the power of revision conferred by s. 191. it is thus clear that the orders passed by the officers of customs are made appealable, and the appellate authority is required to reconsider the matter, hold additional enquiry if thought necessary and decide the contentions raised by the appellant on the merits.
. (vide also sherras v. de rutzen, 1895-
26. the only safeguard which is legitimately available to the vessel in resisting the charge that it has contravened s. 52a is provided by the requirement that the alleged alteration, for instance, must be shown to have beer initially made for the purpose of concealing goods. if the alteration is shown to serve any operational or functional purpose in the ship, that would clearly justify the plea that it was not made for the purpose of concealing goods. it may be that if the alleged alteration, adaptation or construction is proved to have been initially made for a functional or operational purpose, and it is shown that subsequently it has been used without the knowledge of the master or the owners for the illegal purpose, that may raise a triable issue as to whether the alteration falls within the description of s. 52a; but where the alteration is not shown to serve any functional or operational purpose and its very nature suggests that it was intended to serve some secret purpose, it would be easy to draw the inference that its purpose was to conceal goods. therefore, in our opinion, there is no doubt that the customs authorities were right in holding that the mere fact that the owners of the vessel or the master were not shown to have been privy to the alteration etc. or the concealment of gold bars recovered from the offending ship would not take the case of appellant outside the purview of s. 52a. the knowledge of the owners, or even of the master is, in the context of s. 52a, entirely irrelevant. what is relevant is the proof of the fact that the vessel answering the description prescribed by s. 52a entered within the limits of calcutta which is a port in india.
27. mr. choudhary further argued that the alteration on which the case against the appellant is based in the present case cannot be said to be an alteration contemplated by section 52a, because it is not an alteration of the vessel. he suggests that the construction, adaptation, alteration or fitting must be of the vessel as a whole, or, at any rate, of any part of the vessel which can be regarded as its integral or essential part : the panelling wall in which the apertures were made, cannot be treated as a part of the vessel, and so, the alteration in question cannot be said to attract s. 52a. that, in substance, is another argument which has been pressed before us on behalf of the appellant. in support of this argument, mr. choudhary referred us to the certificate issued by mr. b. hill who is a surveyor to llyods register to shipping united with the british corporation register. in this certificate mr. hill purports to say that in his opinion, the panelling and lining constitute no part of the vessel as the expression "vessel" is understood for the purpose of its being assigned the notation 100 a1 or any other class notation in the register book of llyods register of shipping or for the purpose of the issue of a loadline certificate under the merchant shipping acts and that such panelling or lining is not required to be shown in the ship's official plans submitted to llyods register of shipping in connection with the above purposes. he adds that such panelling is customarily installed in british vessels for the health and comfort of crew as a method of insulating accommodation.
28. we are not prepared to accept mr. choudhary's argument that there is any material on the record to show that the panelling is not a part of the vessel. a vessel is defined by s. 3(f) of the act as including anything made for the conveyance by water of human beings or property; and there seems to be no reason to hold that the panelling is not its integral part. mr. hill who has purported to give this certificate has not given evidence in the present proceedings and the statements made by him in his certificate have, therefore, not been tested. besides, his opinion that the panelling does not form part of the vessel as understood for the two purposes mentioned by him in his certificate cannot assist us in determining whether it can be held to be a part of the vessel under section 52a. for whatever purpose panelling may be constructed, once it is constructed it becomes a part of the vessel and as such, any alteration made in the panelling would attract the provisions of s. 52a. we must, therefore, reject mr. choudhary's argument that even if an alteration is proved to have been made in the panels of the vessel, s. 52a could not be applied. the contention which mr. choudhary faintly urged before us, that the holes made in the panelling walls do not constitute an alteration at all is clearly ill-founded, because the manner in which the holes were made and the use which was obviously intended to be made of the said holes, leave no doubt that they constitute alteration within the meaning of s. 52a. thus, our conclusion is that the customs authorities were right in holding that the facts proved in the case showed that the appellant's vessel eastern saga contravened the provisions of s. 52a when it entered the port of calcutta and as such, incurred liability prescribed by s. 167(12a) of the act.29. what is the nature of the liability prescribed by s. 167(12a) is the next question which calls for an answer in the present appeal. we have already seen that s. 167(12a) provides that if a vessel s. 52a, it shall be liable to confiscation and the master of such vessel shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding rs. 1, 000/-. can it be said that the penalty prescribed by s. 167(12a) may in any given case not be imposed against the ship on the ground that the contravention proved against it is of a very trivial character, or has been the result of an act on the part of a criminal who acted on his own contrary to the instructions of the master of the ship ? the words used in the third column of cl. (12a) are that "such vessel be liable to confiscation". the context seems to require that it is not open to the customs authority to refuse to confiscate the vessel on the ground that there are any extenuating circumstances surrounding the contravention of s. 52a in a given case and that it would be unfair to impose the penalty of confiscation. two penalties are prescribed, one is the confiscation of the ship, and the other is a fine against the master. in regard to the latter penalty, it is within the discretion of the customs authority to decide what amount of penalty should be imposed; just as in the case of the first penalty it is not open to it to say that it would not impose the penalty of confiscation against the offending ship, so in the case of the second penalty it is not open to it to say that it will not levy any penalty against the master. in its discretion, it may impose a very small fine against the master if it is satisfied that the master was innocent and despite his best efforts, he could not prevent the contravention of s. 52a. if the two penalties prescribed by clause (12a) had been alternative, the position may have been different; but they are independent penalties, one is against the ship and the other is against the master; and so, there is no scope for contending that the customs authority may refuse to impose one penalty and impose the other, or may refuse to impose either of the two penalties. it must be regarded as an elementary requirement of clause (12a) that as soon as the offence referred to in column 1 of the said clause is proved, some penalty has to be imposed and cl. (12a) indicates that two penalties have to be imposed and not one, there being discretion in regard to the penalty imposable against the master as regards the amount of the said penalty. therefore, we do not think it would be possible to take the view that if there are extenuating circumstances attending the contravention of s. 52a in a given case the customs authority can refrain from confiscating the vessel. confiscation of the vessel is the immediate statutory consequence of the finding that an offence under clause (12a) is established, just as the imposition of some penalty against the master is another statutory consequence of the same contravention. in fairness, we ought to add that mr. choudhary did not support the view which appears to have been taken by sinha, j. in the case taken before him under art. 226 by the everett orient line incorporated (vide w.p. no. 121/1959 and c.a. no. 374/1961 which have been heard along with this appeal and will be dealt with separately). it appears that in that case sinha, j., field that there was discretion in the customs authority in the exercise of which it may, in a proper case, refuse to confiscate the offending vessel. in our opinion, this view is not justified by the words of clause (12a) of s. 167.30. but the confiscation of the offending vessel under clause (12a) is not the end of the matter. in dealing with the offence adjudicated under cl. (12a) of s. 167, the customs officer has also to exercise his jurisdiction under s. 183 of the act. in fact, s. 167(12a) and s. 183 have to be read together and the adjudication proceedings have to be dealt within the light of the provisions of the said two sections. section 183 lays down that whenever confiscation is authorised by this act, the officer adjudicating it shall give the owner of the goods an option to pay in lieu of confiscation such fine as the officer thinks fit. it is thus clear that in dealing with offences under s. 167(12a) an obligation is imposed upon the customs officer to give the owner of the goods an option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation. it is not disputed, and rightly, that the word "goods" used in s. 183 includes vessels, and so, when the adjudicating officer was dealing with the present case, it was his duty to indicate the fine which the owners of the ship can, in their option, choose to pay. that is why the construction of clause (12a) of s. 167 which leaves no discretion in the adjudicating officer in the matter of confiscating the ship, does not finally determine the matter. though confiscation is a statutory corollary of the contravention of s. 52a, the legislature realised that confiscation of the vessel may cause unnecessary hardship to the owners of the vessel, and so, s. 183 expressly requires the adjudicating officer to give an option to the owners of the offending vessel. confiscation is no doubt authorised and required by s. 167(12a), but the statutory obligation makes it necessary for the officer to give an option to the owners, and so, in substance, the ultimate penalty which may be imposed on the owners does fall to be determined in the discretion of the said officer. section 183 confers discretion on the officer to determine what amount of fine should be imposed in lieu of confiscation, and in doing so, he will undoubtedly have to take into account all relevant and material circumstances, including the extenuating factors on which the owners may rely. thus, the confiscation of the offending vessel which has been taken out of the domain of the customs officer's discretion under clause (12a), is indirectly brought within his discretion under s. 183. indeed, the scheme of s. 183 shows that the only penalty which, in law the officer can impose is one of confiscation. having done that, he gives an option to the owners of the vessel to pay a fine in lieu of confiscation. there is little doubt that this scheme has been adopted, because if the imposition of fine was made an alternative penalty, difficulties would have arisen in the way of recovering the fine; and so, the legislature has provided that the offending ship should be retained, if the offence is proved, it should be confiscated and the owner of the vessel should be given an option to get his vessel released by paying the fine which may be imposed on him under s. 183. the very fact that an option has to be given to the owner shows that the fine imposed under s. 183 is not a matter of penalty imposed by the officer as such, but is only an option given to the owner. therefore, we are satisfied that on a fair reading of s. 167(12a) and s. 183 of the act, the course adopted by the customs authorities is not open to any challenge.31. mr. choudhary then attempted to argue that on the merits. the central board of revenue was in error in holding that s. 52a had been contravened by the appellant's vessel eastern saga. we have already indicated in brief the findings recorded by the customs authorities. it is true that the additional collector of customs accepted the plea of the appellant that the owners of the vessel were not concerned with the illegal importation of gold into india within the meaning of s. 167(8) of the act; but he has also found that the preventive measures taken by the owners, the agents and the master for stopping smuggling on board their vessel proved hopelessly inadequate and ineffective. he has also examined the nature of the alterations made and he has concluded that the alterations were made for the purpose of concealing goods. in fact, the presence of so many alterations on this vessel itself would justify the conclusion that they were made for the illegal purpose prohibited by s. 52a. but when gold bars 1, 358 in numbers were actually recovered from one of the holes made in the panelling wall, it is impossible to resist the confusion that the said alteration had been made for the purpose of concealing the said gold. it is clear that the said alterations serve no operational or functional purpose in the ship and the manner in which the said alterations have been made unmistakably indicates the design for concealing goods. if the goods intended to be concealed were not contraband, this elaborate designing of the alteration would be wholly unnecessary. therefore, we see no substance in the argument that the customs authorities were in error in finding that s. 52a had been contravened in the present case. besides, there is no doubt that the question as to whether s. 52a had been contravened is substantially a question of fact and this court would not ordinarily reconsider the matter on evidence with a view to decide whether the said finding is right or not.32. mr. choudhary has then argued that the imposition of a fine of rs. 25 lacs is excessive and should be mollified by us. he suggests that if such a heavy fine is imposed against a vessel, it may indirectly and eventually affect the trade of the country. besides, he urges that the fine appears to be so unreasonable that it may be characterised as vindicative. incidentally, he has argued that in imposing the fine, the additional collector of customs took into consideration an irrelevant fact inasmuch as to bore in mind the loss suffered by the appellant during the period that the vessel was detained. there is no difficulty in rejecting the last argument, because if the consideration in question was irrelevant, it has operated in favour of the appellant and not against it. if that consideration had not weighed in the mind of the additional collector, he would obviously have imposed a higher fine. then as to the extent of the fine, we are not prepared to hold that the fine is unreasonable or excessive. we have already noticed the value of the gold illegally imported and we have seen the presence of many suspicious alterations in the panelling walls and other parts of the vessel. it is not easy to detect the illegal importation of gold, and so, if the customs authorities took the view that having regard to the value of the gold imported, the presence of a large number of alterations and the value of the ship, rs. 25 lacs should be imposed as a fine, we cannot entertain the argument that a case is made out for our interference under art. 136 of the constitution. after all, the imposition of the fine merely gives an option to the appellant to pay the fine and secure the release of the vessel. since the amount of the fine imposed is very much less than the value of the vessel, it is the interests of the appellant to get the vessel released. besides, the question as to the propriety of the fine imposed by the additional collector of customs has been examined by the appellate and the revisional authorities and they have seen no reason to interfere with the amount of fine. in such a case, the appellant cannot be heard to complain against the impugned order of fine in an appeal under art. 136 when no question of principle or law is involved.33. in this connection, we may mention one consideration which has weighed in our mind. it is true that modern criminology does not encourage the imposition of severe or savage sentences against criminals, because the deterrent or punitive aspect of punishment is no longer treated as a valid consideration in the administration of criminal law. but it must be remembered that ordinary offences with which the normal criminal law of the country deals are committed by persons either under the pressure of provoked and unbalanced emotions, or as a result of adverse environments and circumstances, and so, while dealing with these criminals who, in many cases, deserve a sympathetic treatment and in a few cases, are more sinned against than sinners, criminal law treats punishment more as a reformative or corrective than as a deterrent or punitive measure. but it may not be appropriate to adopt the same approach in dealing with every offence committed by a vessel which contravenes s. 52a. illegal importation of gold has assumed the proportions of a major problem faced by the country, and the manifold, clever and ingenious devices adopted in carrying out these illegal operations tend to show that the organisation which is responsible for them is inspired merely by cupidity because it conducts its operations solely for the purpose of making profit, and so, it would be open to the customs authorities to take the view that the best way to check the spread of these illegal operations is to impose deterrent fines whenever these offences are discovered and proved. having regard to this aspect of the matter, if the customs authorities took the view that the fine of rs. 25 lakhs was called for in the present case, we see no reason whatever to entertain the plea made by mr. choudhary that the said fine should be reduced. the argument that the impact of such heavy fines may adversely affect the trade of the country, seems to us to be wholly misconceived and ill-founded.34. there is one more point which must be mentioned before we part with this appeal. mr. choudhary attempted to argue if that if mens rea was not regarded as an essential element of s. 52a, the said section would be ultra vires articles 14, 19 and 31(1) and as such, unconstitutional and invalid. we do not propose to consider the merits of this argument, because the appellant is not only a company, but also a foreign company, and as such, is not entitled to claim the benefits of art. 19. it is only citizens of india who have been guaranteed the right to freedom enshrined in the said article. if that is so, the plea under art. 31(1) as well as under art. 14 cannot be sustained for the simple reason that in supporting the said two pleas, inevitably the appellant has to fall back upon the fundamental right guaranteed by art. 19(1)(f). the whole argument is that the appellant is deprived of its property by operation of the relevant provisions of the act and these provisions are invalid. all that art. 31(1) provides is that no person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law. as soon as this plea is raised, it is met by the obvious answer that the appellant has been deprived of its property by authority of the provisions of the act and that would be the end of the plea under art. 31(1) unless the appellant is able to take the further step of challenging the validity of the act, and that necessarily imports art. 19(1)(f). similarly, when a plea is raised under art. 14, we face the same position. it may be that if s. 52a contravenes art. 19(1)(f), a citizen of india may contend that his vessel cannot be confiscated even if it has contravened s. 52a, and in that sense, there would be inequality between the citizen and the foreigner, but that inequality is the necessary consequence of the basic fact that art. 19 is confined to citizens of india, and so, the plea that art. 14 is contravened also must take in art. 19 if it has to succeed. the plain truth is that certain rights guaranteed to the citizens of india under art. 19 are not available to foreigners and pleas which may successfully be raised by the citizens on the strength of the said rights guaranteed under art. 19 would, therefore, not be available to foreigners. that being so, we see no substance its the argument that if s. 52a is construed against the appellant, it would be invalid, and so, the appellant would be able to resist the confiscation of its vessel under art. 31(1). we ought to make it clear that we are expressing no opinion on the validity of s. 52a under art. 19(1)(f). if the said question were to arise for our decision in any case, we would have to consider whether the provisions of s. 52a are not justified by art. 19(5). that is a matter which is foreign to the enquiry in the present appeal.35. the result is the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
36. the appellant has also filed w.p. no. 138 of 1961 challenging the validity of the order passed by the central government in the same matter. since the appeal preferred by the appellant against the said order is dismissed, the writ petition also fails and is dismissed. there would be not order as to costs in the writ petition.
