judgment
the judgment of gajendragadkar, c. j., m. hidayatullah, shah and sikri jj. was delivered by gajendragadkar c.j. bachawat j. delivered a separate opinion.
gajendragadkar, c.j. -
the appellant, the associate cement companies, ltd., bhupendra cement works, surajpur, challenges the validity of the appellate order passed by respondent no. 2 on july 4, 1962 under the provision of the said rule, directing the appellant to reinstate its welfare officer, p. n. sharma - respondent no. 1. at the hearing of this appeal, a preliminary objection has been raised by mr. goyal on behalf of respondent no. 1 that special leave should not have been granted to the appellant, because the appeal is incompetent inasmuch as respondent no. 2 against whose appellate decision the appellant purports to have preferred the present appeal is not a tribunal under art. 136(1). if the preliminary objection fails, then it would become necessary to consider the appellant's contention that the impugned appellant order is invalid and erroneous and must be set aside
(no. 63 of 1948) (hereafter called the act) read with the provisions of the rules, the appellant was required to appoint one welfare officer and to notify his appointment and qualification to the chief inspector of factories. respondent no. 1 was appointed such a welfare officer. the letter of appointment issued to him on march 2, 1956, stated that he would be liable to be transferred from one unit of the appellant to another and that his services could be terminated by the appellant by one month's notice or with one month's pay in lieu thereof. respondent no. 1 was first posted at lakheri cement works, lakheri in rajasthan, where he jointed duty on march 14, 1956. thereafter, he was transferred from one place to another according to the requirements of service and the working of the appellant's factories. on june 26, 1960, he was posted at the bhupendra cement works. he was working at these works until september 26, 1951, when his services were terminated. it appears that appellant transferred respondent no. 1 from bhupendra cement works to kymore works which is near katni in madhya pradesh, but apparently, respondent no. 1 was not prepared to go to kymore works, and after long and protracted correspondence between the parties, the appellant wrote to him on september 26, 1961, that since he had not proceeded to kymore on transfer as directed, he had ceased to be in the employment of the appellant, and his name had been struck off from the company's rollrespondent no. 1 then filed an appeal before respondent no. 2 as the appellate authority under r. 6(6) of the rules. on receiving notice of the said appeal, the appellant filed its written statement and disputed the validity of the grievance made by respondent no. 1 in respect of the termination of his services. respondent no. 2 then passed the impugned order on july 4, 1962. this order was issued in the name of the governor of punjab in exercise of the powers conferred by r. 6(6) of the rules, and it directed that the governor of punjab was pleased to reinstate respondent no. 1 as labour welfare officer in the service of the appellant. "however", says the order,
before proceeding to deal with the preliminary objection, we may conveniently refer to the relevant provisions of the act and the rules. the act has been passed in 1948 with the object of consolidating and amending the law regulating labour in factories. consistently with this object and policy, the act has made several beneficent provisions in the interests of industrial labour employed in factories to which the act applies. section 49 deals with the appointment of welfare officers. section 49(1) provides that in every factory wherein five hundred or more workers are ordinarily employed, the occupier shall employ in the factory such number of welfare officers as may be prescribed. it is common ground that the appellant falls within the scope of section 49(1) and so, it has been appointing welfare officer in its factories; in fact, respondent no. 1 was one of such welfare officers appointed by the appellant. section 49(2) provides that the state government may prescribe the duties, qualifications and conditions of service of officers employed under sub-section (1). it is by virtue of the powers conferred on the state government that respondent no. 2 has framed the rulesthe rules were framed by respondent no. 2 in 1952 and have been published in the punjab government gazette on march 26, 1952, and they came into force from september 30, 1952. rule 4 prescribes the qualifications for the appointment of a welfare officer. r. 5 provides for the procedure which has to be followed in appointing welfare officers. r. 6 prescribes conditions of services of welfare officers and r. 7 prescribes their duties. r. 8 confers power on the state government to exempt any factory or class or description of factories from the operation of all or any of these rules, subject to compliance with such alternative arrangement as may be approved. in the present appeal, we are concerned with r. 6. r. 6 reads thus :-
notwithstanding anything in this chapter, the supreme court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the territory of india.
constituted by the state and are invested with judicial as distinguished from purely administrative or executive functions.
the power of dismissal conferred on the watch committee by section 191(4) could not have been exercised and cannot now be exercised until the watch committee have informed the constable of the grounds on which they propose to proceed and have given him a proper opportunity to present his case in defence.
"(p. 476)." the condition precedent, "said mahajan j.," for bringing a tribunal within the ambit of art. 136 is that it should be constituted by the state. again, a tribunal would be outside the ambit of art. 136 if it is not invested with any part of the judicial functions of the state but discharges purely administrative or executive duties (p. 478).
the condition precedent for bringing a tribunal within the ambit of art. 136, "observed shah, j., who spoke for the court," is that it should be constituted by the state;
it is now well settled by the majority decision of this court in the case of bharat bank ltd. v. employees of bharat bank ltd. (1950 s.c.r. 459.) that the expression 'tribunal' as used in article 136 does not mean the same thing as 'court' but includes, within its ambit, all adjudicating bodies, provided they are constituted by the state and are invested with judicial as distinguished from purely administrative or executive functions.
delegates of the judicial power of the state"," invested with the state's inherent judicial powers"," exercise judicial powers of the state."
now, the expression" judicial power of the state
tribunals adorned with similar trappings as court but strictly no coming within that definition.
whether a particular body or authority is a tribunal or not, sometimes a rough and ready test is applied by enquiring whether the said body or authority is clothed with the trappings of a court", but he added that" apart from the trappings of a court, the basic and essential condition which makes an authority or a body a tribunal under art. 136, is that it should be constituted by the state and should be invested with the state's inherent judicial power." similar observations were made by the same learned judge in indo-china steam navigation co. v. jasjit singh
an authority other than a court may be vested by statute with judicial power in widely different circumstances, which it would be impossible and indeed inadvisable to a attempt to define exhaustively. the proper thing is to examine each case as it arises, and to ascertain whether the powers vested in the authority can be truly described as judicial functions or judicial power of the state. for the purpose of this case, and sufficient to say that any outside authority empowered by the state to determined conclusively the rights of two or more contending parties with regard to any matter in controversy between them satisfies the test of an authority vested with the judicial powers of the state and may be regarded as a tribunal within the meaning of art. 136. such a power of adjudication implies that the authority must act judicially and must determine the dispute by ascertainment of the relevant facts on the materials before it and by application of the relevant law to those facts. this test of a tribunal is not meant to be exhaustive, and it may be that other bodies not satisfying this test are also tribunals. in order to be a tribunal, it is essential that the power of adjudication must be derived from a statute or a statutory rule. an authority or body deriving its power of adjudication from an agreement of the parties, such as a private arbitrator or a tribunal acting under section 10-a of the
vests an arbitrator with some of the trappings of a court, so also the
(hereafter referred to as the service rules) is a tribunal within the meaning of art. 136 of the
. the state government made the service rules in exercise of its rule-making power under section 112 read with section 49(2) of the
. it follows that the preliminary objection that the appeal under art. 136 does not lie, must be rejectedon the merits, the respondent has very little to say. the management did not seek to impose any punishment on the welfare officer. it did not hold any enquiry with regard to any charge against the respondent. under the conditions of service, the management was entitled to terminate the services of the respondent on payment of one month's salary in lieu of notice. in accordance with the conditions of service, the management terminated his employment. in no sense was this order of termination of employment a punishment within the meaning of sub-r. (3) of r. 6 of the service rules. the order of the management did not entail any evil consequences to the respondent; it did not deprive him of any right to which he was entitled. as the action of the management was not an order of punishment, the respondent was not entitled to appeal from this order to the state government, nor was the state government entitled to order his reinstatement. the appeal as also the order of the state government passed on the appeal are both misconceived. the appellate order is not only erroneous but also without jurisdiction, and is liable to be set aside
