the judgment was delivered by satyanarayana raju, j
per satyanarayana raju, jthese appeals, on certificate granted by the high court of mysore, raise the question of the constitutional validity of the
(act 14 of 1961).
by virtue of the provisions of the
, a new state known as the state of mysore was formed comprising the territories of the then existing state of mysore, certain districts in the then existing states of bombay and hyderabad, south kanara district in the state of madras except certain parts thereof and the then existing state of coorg. the legislature of the new state of mysore enacted the
(act 14 of 1961), hereinafter referred to as the act. it received the assent of the president on july 8, 1961. sub-section (3) of s. 1 authorized the state government to fix a date for the commencement of the act. by notification, dated january 9, 1963, the government of mysore notified that the said act shall come into force with effect from february 1, 1963. immediately after the act was assented to by the president, the governor of mysore, in exercise of the powers vested in him under proviso to art. 309 of the
and other powers enabling him in that behalf, framed rules called
in order to make recruitment to the posts of village accountants. the rules regulated the pay and other conditions of service of the village accountants.
by a notification issued on 6 january 1963, the government of mysore directed the deputy commissioners to appoint persons recruited under the rules and relieve the then holders of their offices and if the number of candidates fell short, to continue the existing holders in their posts. there was a further direction that other village officers, viz., patels, thoties and talaries, whose posts were also abolished under the act, should be continued in their present posts pending consideration by the government of the question as to whether they should be continued.the appellants have filed petitions under art. 226 of the
.
we may now examine the provisions of the act. the preamble reads :
as meaning
(ii) assignments of revenue payable in respect of lands;
(iii) fees in money of agricultural produce; and
(iv) money, salaries and all other kinds of remuneration granted or continued in respect of, or annexed to, any village office, by the state.
.
section 4 provides for the abolition of all village offices together with the incidents thereof. sub-section (1) of s. 4 provides that all village offices shall be abolished; sub-sec. (2), that all incidents appertaining to the said village offices shall be extinguished; and sub-sec. (3), that all lands granted or continued in respect of or annexed to a village office by the state shall be resumed and shall be subject to the payment of land revenue as if it were an unalienated land or ryotwari land. sections 5 and 6 provide for the regrant of those lands to the holders of the village offices subject to the payment of occupancy price.section 7 regulates the eviction of unauthorized holders and regrant to them, in certain circumstances, of land resumed under s. 4. section 7 makes applicable the existing tenancy laws to the lands regranted under ss. 5. to 7. section 9 provides for relief to the holders of village offices abolished under the act of payment of certain sums in such manner and in such instalments as may be prescribed. section 11 authorized the state government to make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the act. section 12 provides for the repeal of the enactments specified in sch. i which are : the
; the
; the
; the
; the
; and the madras karnams regulation, 1802.
as already stated, after the act received the assent of the president on july 8, 1961, the governor of mysore, in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to art. 309 of the constitution and the powers vested in him under the various acts referred to in the notification, made rules entitled the
