the judgment was delivered by v. ramaswamy. j.
civil appeal no. 1038 of 1965 this appeal is brought, by certificate, from the judgment of the high court of punjab dated march 11, 1964, dismissing the writ petition of the appellant-civil writ no. 189-d of 1962
in his petition under article 226 of the
, the appellant, s.g. jaisinghani, challenged the constitutional validity of what has been described as the "seniority rule" in regard to the income-tax service, class i, grade ii, along with the improper implementation of the "quota" recruitment to that service as infringing the guarantee of articles 14 and 16(1) of the
. the original respondents to the petition were the union of india, secretary to the government of india in the ministry of finance and the central board of revenue-respondents nos.1 to 3. subsequently, respondents nos. 4 to 126 were added and those are promotees in the income-tax service who will be affected by the result of the petition
in order to improve the income-tax administration, the government of india, on september 29, 1944, reconstituted and classified the existing income-tax services as class i and ii. the re-organisational scheme provided for recruitment of income-tax officers, class i, grade ii service, partly by promotion and partly by direct recruitment. the re-organisational scheme was set out in government of india, finance department (central revenues) letter dated september 29, 1944 (exhibit b). it created two classes of income-tax service, class i with grade i and grade ii and class ii service with grade iii. recruitment to class i, grade ii service, was to be made : (a) by direct recruitment through a competitive examination, and (b) by promotion from class ii, grade iii, the ratio prescribed in paragraph 2(d) of the letter being 80 per cent. by direct recruitment and 20 per cent. by promotion from class ii, grade iii service, and in case sufficient number of suitable candidates was not avilable for promotion, surplus vacancies would be filled by direct recruitment. in government of india, ministry of finance (revenue division) letter dated january 24, 1950 (exhibit g to the writ petition), the rules of seniority were laid down. these rules laid down the principle for determination of seniority (a) as between direct recruits recruited on the results of the combined competitive examination ; (b) as between promotees selected from class ii and (c) as between the direct recruits who complete their probation in a given year and the promotees in the same year for appointment to class i. these rules were revised on september 5, 1952, by the government of india, ministry of finance, revenue division, letter no. f. no. 58(3)-ad.it/50, dated september 5, 1952. the relevant rule, viz., rule 1 (f), as framed in 1950, was as follows
illustration "a"
year of com- year of year of depart- position of direct promotees petitive exam. appoint- comple- mental recruit seniority
ment by tion of promotion
direct 2 years' committee
recruit- probation met
ment
1 2 3 4 5 6
(1947) 1948 1950 has completed pro- senior the three pre- bation
vious years
probation
probation
(1950) i951 1953 1950 do. do
illustration "b"
year of com- year of year of depart- position of direct promotees petitive exam. appoint- comple- mental recruit seniority
ment by tion of promotion
direct 2 years' committee
recruit- probation met
ment
1 2 3 4 5 6
probation
(1952) 1953 1955 do. do. (1953) 1954 1956 in 1953 do. do
a class ii officer when directly recruited had to be on probation for two years during which period he had to undergo a course of theoretical and practical training and should pass a departmental examination for being confirmed. after a minimum period of three years of work as income-tax officer (after his probation of two years) he is considered by the departmental promotion committee for promotion to class i. that is to say that he has to have a minimum service of 5 years in all in class ii before he is qualified for being considered for promotion to class i, grade ii service.clause (iv) of rule 1(f) deals with a special situation in which an officer initially appointed to class ii service is given senority in the same manner as a departmental promotee if subsequent to his passing the departmental examination in class ii he is appointed to class i on the results of the combined competitive examination held by the union public service commission
on october 18, 1951, the recruitment quotas of 80 per cent. and 2per cent. under the reorganisation scheme dated september 29, 1944, were revised. under the revised recruitment quota rule 66-2/3 per cent. of the vacancies in grade ii, class i, would be filled by direct recruitment and the remaining 33-1/3 per cent. by promotion from grade iii, class ii service. any surplus vacancies which could not be filled by promotion for want of suitable candidates were to be added to the quota of vacancies to be filled by direct recruitment
rule 4 of the rules of promotions at page 251 of the central board of revenue office procedure manual has also been the subject-matter of controversy in this appeal and is set out below
the full bench of the punjab high court rejected the writ petition of the appellant holding that the principles for determining seniority between direct recruits and promotees laid down in rule 1(f) (iii) and (iv), 1952, were not discriminatory and there was no infringement of articles 14 and 16(1) of the
. it was also decided by the full bench that the quota rule announced by the government of india was merely a policy statement and had no statutory force and departure from the quota did not give rise to any justiciable issue. it was further observed that the promotion rule from class i, grade ii, to class i, grade i, was not discriminatory and ultra vires of articles 14 and 16 of the constitutionthe first question to be considered in this appeal is whether rule 1(f) (iii) of the seniority rules as framed in 1952 violates the guarantee under articles 14 and 16 of the
is only an incident of the application of the concept of equality enshrined in article 14 thereof. it gives effect to the doctrine of equality in the matter of appointment and promotion. it follows that there can be a reasonable classification of the employees for the purpose of appointment or promotion. the concept of equality in the matter of promotion can be predicated only when the promotees are drawn from the same source. if the preferential treatment of one source in relation to the other is based on the differences between the said two sources, and the said differences have a reasonable relation to the nature of the office or offices to which recruitment is made, the said recruitment can legitimately be sustained on the basis of a valid classification. dealing with the extent of protection of article 16(1) of the
, this court observed in general manager, southern railway v. rangachari
we next proceed to consider the argument of the appellant that the rule of promotion from income-tax officers class i, grade ii, to class i, grade i, is discriminatory in character. it was contended that while a direct recruit has to put in 5 years as income-tax officer class i, grade ii, a promotee officer gets into grade i with a minimum of one year's service in class i, grade ii, the other four years being counted in class ii, grade iii. it was, therefore, submitted that the rule operated against the direct recruit in a discriminatory manner. in our opinion, there is no substance in the contention of the appellant. once it is held that the rule of seniority enacted in rule 1(f)(iii) is legally valid, the rule of promotion, i.e., rule 4 of chapter ix of the central board of revenue office procedure manual cannot be held to lead to any discrimination as between direct recruits and promotees. rule 4 states that the prescribed minimum service for class i, grade ii officer, in the matter of promotion to grade i of that service is five years gazetted service including one year in class i, grade ii. for a promotee, therefore, the minimum period of service for promotion to class i, grade i, is actually 4 years' service in class ii, grade iii, and one year service in class i, grade ii. the object of the rule is really to carry out the policy of rule 1 (f)(iii) of the rules of seniority and not allow it to be defeated by the requirement of five years' service in class i, grade ii, itself before consideration for promotion to class i, grade i. the promotee is placed senior to a direct recruit who completes probation in the year in which the promotee is selected by the departmental promotion committee. if it should be laid down that the past service as income-tax officer in class ii is not to be counted, then rule 1(f)(iii) would be nullified, because directly recruited officers junior to the promotees would go to grade i earlier than the promotee officers. for example, a promotee certified fit by the departmental promotion committee in 1952 will be senior to the direct recruits who complete their probation in that year. and if it is to be laid down that the promotee officer shall not count his period of service in class ii for the purpose of promotion to grade i, class i, he will have to wait till 1957 or 1958 to go to grade i, class i, while direct recruits who completed their probation in 1952 or 1953 would have gone to grade i, class i, in 1955 or 1956, counting the five years' period from the date on which they were placed on probation. to remove this anomaly the promotion rule has been framed and we are unable to accept the argument of the appellant that there is any discrimination in the working of this rule. the rule of promotion is inextricably linked with the rule of weightage and seniority in grade ii. if in the rule of promotion the service in grade iii is not to be taken into account, seniority in grade ii would be an empty formalityin regard to rule 1(f)(iv) of the seniority rules, there are only three respondents, i.e., respondents nos. 4, 5 and 6, who have been promoted as "deemed promotees" under this clause of the rule. each one of them was appointed in class ii, grade iii service in 1947 and was appointed in class i, grade ii service, in 1951 after having successfully competed in the competitive examination of the year 1950, the same year in which the appellant was successful. the appellant also joined class i, grade ii service, in 1951. the three respondents have been shown as senior to the appellant in the seniority list. the objection of the appellant is that while they qualified in the same competitive examination, they had become senior to him because of the operation of the artificial rule by which they are treated as "deemed promotees"; otherwise they would have remained junior to him. on behalf of these respondents it was argued by mr. bindra that they had been appointed to class ii, grade iii service, in 1947 and completed 5 years' service in that class by the year 1952 and if the departmental promotion committee met in 1953, as it actually did meet, and if it recommended their promotion to class i, grade ii, each one of them would have become senior to the appellant by the operation of clause (iii) to rule 1(f). there was also the further consideration that if rule 1 (f)(iv) did not exist there was no incentive to a promotee of this type to sit for the competitive examination. it should also be taken into account that if the service of the promotees in class ii, grade iii, is entirely ignored and if they join the class i, grade ii service, as direct recruits, they might well find themselves becoming junior to those who were left behind in class ii, grade iii service, by the operation of rule 1(f)(iii). we are accordingly of the opinion that rule 1 (f)(iv) is based on a reasonable classification and does not offend the guarantee under article 14 or article 16(1) of the constitutionwe proceed to consider the next question arising for consideration in this appeal, viz., the allegation of the appellant that there was excessive recruitment of promotees in violation of the quota rule. rule 3 of the income-tax officers (class i, grade ii)
subject to the provisions of rule 3, government shall determine the method or methods to be employed for the purpose of filling any particular vacancies, or such vacancies as may require to be filled during any particular period, and the number of candidates to be recruited by each method."
rule 5 states
" vacancies in the service which are filled otherwise than by promotion shall be apportioned between the various communities in india in accordance with the provisions of the government of india (home department) resolution no. f. 14/17-b/33-ests. dated the 4th july, 1934 (regarding communal representation in the services) and no. 23/5/42-ests. (s) dated the 11th august, 1943 (regarding representation of scheduled castes in the services), and the supplementary instructions connected therewith.
80 per cent. of the vacancies arising in the grade will be filled by direct recruitment through the indian audit and allied services examination and the remaining 20 per cent. vacancies will be filled on the basis of promotion by selection provided suitable number of men are available for promotion.
means sound discretion guided by law. it must be governed by rule, not by humour : it must not be arbitrary, vague, and fanciful."
we should also like to suggest to the government that for future years the roster system should be adopted by framimg an appropriate rule for working out the quota between the direct recruits and the promotees and that a roster should be maintained indicating the order in which appointments are made by direct recruitment and by promotion in accordance with the percentages fixed under the statutory rule for each method of recruitment
for these reasons we allow this appeal in part and order that a writ in the nature of mandamus should be granted to the appellant to the extent indicated above. there will be no order as to costs in this appealwrit petitions no. 5 of 1966
should be granted commanding respondents nos. 1 to 3 to adjust the seniority of the petitioner and other officers similarly placed like him and to prepare a fresh seniority list in accordance with law after adjusting the recruitment for the period 1951 to 1956 and onwards in accordance with the quota rule prescribed in the letter no. f. 24(2) admn. i. t./51 dated october 18, 1951, of the government of india. there will be no order as to costs
