the judgment was delivered by shah, j. :
shah, j. for the perumal nadar married annapazham (daughter of kailasa nadar - an indian christian) on november 29, 1950, at kannimadam in the state of travancore-cochin according to hindu rites. annapazham gave birth to two children - the first on september 14, 1951 and the other on march 5, 1958. the elder child died shortly after its birth. the younger named ponnuswami acting through is mother annapazham as his guardian filed an action in the court of the subordinate judge, tirunelveli, for separate possession of a half share in the properties of the joint family held by his father perumal. the suit was defended by perumal contending that he had not married annapazham as claimed by her; that if it be proved that marriage ceremony had been performed, it was invalid, and in any event ponnuswami was an illegitimate child and could not claim a share in his estate. the trial court rejected the defence, and decreed the suit. perumal appealed to the high court of madras, but without success. with certificate under article 133(1)(c) of the
, this appeal is preferred.
2. three contentions are urged in support of this appeal : (1) that annapazham was an indian christian and a marriage between a hindu and an indian christian is regarded by the courts in india as void; (2) that the marriage was invalid because it was prohibited by the madras act 6 of 1949; (3) that annapazham and perumal were living apart for a long time before the birth of ponnuswami and on that account ponnuswami could not be regarded as legitimate child of perumal.
3. annapazham was born of christian parents and she followed the christian faith. she married perumal when she was about 19 years of age. it is not now in dispute that on november 19, 1950 she went through the ceremony of marriage and lived with perumal as his wife for several years thereafter. the children born to annapazham in september 1951 and march 1958 were entered in the register of births as hindus. on the occasion of the marriage printed invitations were sent to the relatives of perumal and of annapazham and an agreement was executed by perumal and annapazham reciting that :
the marriage ceremony was performed according to hindu rites and customs : a bridal platform was constructed and perumal tied the sacred thali which it is customary for a hindu husband to tie in acknowledgment of the performance of the marriage ceremony.
4. the high court on a consideration of the evidence recorded the following finding :
perumal who had previously been married to one seethalakshmi agreed to and did go through the marriage ceremony. it is in evidence that marriage between hindu males belonging to the nadar community and christian females are common and the wife after the marriage is accepted as a member of the hindu nadar community.
5. mr. gupte on behalf of perumal contends that a valid marriage may taken place between two hindus only and not between a hindu and a non-hindu and in the absence of any evidence to show that annapazham was converted to hinduism before she married perumal, the marriage, even if performed according the hindu rites and ceremonies, is not valid in law. also contended that the evidence that annapazham lived after the marriage as a hindu will not validate the marriage.
6. it is not necessary to decide in this case whether marriage between a hindu male and an indian christian female may be regarded as valid, for, in our judgment, the finding of the courts below that annapazham was converted to hinduism before her marriage with perumal is amply supported by evidence. a person may be a hindu by birth or by conversion. a mere theoretical allegiance to the hindu faith by a person born in another faith does not convert him into a hindu, nor is a bare declaration that he is a hindu sufficient to convert him to hinduism. but a bona fide intention to be converted to the hindu faith, accompanied by conduct unequivocally expressing that intention may be sufficient evidence of conversion. no formal ceremony of purification or expiation is necessary to effectuate conversion.
7. in muthusami mudaliar v. masilamani alias subramania mudaliar,
8. in goona durgaprasada rao and another v. goona sudarasanaswami and others,
9. the evidence clearly establishes that the parents of annapazham arranged the marriage. the marriage was performed according to hindu rites and ceremonies in the presence of relatives who were invited to attend : customary ceremonies peculiar to a marriage between hindus were performed : no objection was raised to the marriage and after the marriage annapazham was accepted by the local hindu nadar community as belonging to the hindu faith, and the plaintiff was also treated as a hindu. on the evidence there can be no doubt that annapazham bona fide intended to contract marriage with perumal. absence of specific expiatory or purificatory ceremonies will not, in our judgment, be sufficient to hold that she was not converted to hinduism before the marriage ceremony was performed. the fact that perumal chose to go through the marriage ceremony according to hindu rites with annapazham in the presence of a large number of persons clearly indicates that he accepted that annapazham was converted to hinduism before the marriage ceremony was performed.
provided by sections 3 and 4(1) :
11. mr. gupte contended that perumal was domiciled in the village of kannamkulam, taluka nanguneri, district tirunelveli in the state of madras and on that account governed by madras act 6 of 1949, and since perumal had been previously married to seethalakshmi who was alive, his marriage with annapazham was invalid. the courts below have held that perumal had married seethalakshmi before he married annapazham, and that seethalakshmi was alive at the date of perumal's marriage with annapazham. but no contention was raised in the written statement filed by perumal that he was domiciled in the state of madras. the marriage with annapazham took place in kannimadam which is admittedly within the territory of the state of travancore-cochin and after the marriage perumal and annapazham lived at kannimadam. m. thangiah nadar p.w. 2, and kailasa nadar p.w. 4 have deposed that the families of annapazham and perumal were the subjects of the travancore maharaja and that evidence was not challenged. perumal and annapazham were married according to the ceremonies which made a valid marriage : they had lived as husband and wife and if it was the case of perumal that the marriage was, by reason of the prohibition contained in madras act 6 of 1949, invalid, it was for him to set up and to establish that plea by evidence. it is true that an attempt was made after plaintiff closed here case to suggest to witnesses examined that he perumal was a resident of kannamkulam and that he occasionally visited kannimadam where he had a house. but no argument was raised that perumal was domiciled in the state of madras. in the absence of any such contention, the trial court held that perumal was not domiciled in the state of madras. it cannot be held in the absence of a specific plea and issue raised to that end that perumal was domiciled in the state of madras and was on that account governed by the provisions of the
. we agree with the high court that it is not proved that perumal was domiciled in the state of madras at the date of his marriage with annapazham.
12. nor can we accept the contention that the plaintiff ponnuswami is an illegitimate child. if it be accepted that there was a valid marriage between perumal and annapazham and during the subsistence of the marriage the plaintiff was born, a conclusive presumption arises that he was the son of perumal, unless it be established that at the time when the plaintiff was conceived, perumal had no access to annapazham. there is evidence on the record that there were in 1957 some disputes between annapazham and perumal. annapazham had lodged a complaint before the magistrate's court that perumal had contracted marriage with one bhagavathi. that complaint was dismissed and the order was confirmed by the high court of madras. because of this complaint, the relations between the parties were strained and they were living apart. but it is still common ground that perumal and annapazham were living in the same village, and unless perumal was able to establish absence of access, the presumption raised by section 112 of the
will not be displaced.
13. in chilukuri venkateswarlu v. chilukuri venkatanarayana (
, and since on the basis of that proof there was evidence on the record that the plaintiff's mother lived in the house gifted to her by her husband and there was no impossibility of cohabitation between the parties, there was no acceptable evidence of non-access.
14. in ammathayee v. kumaresain (
can only be displaced if it is sown that the parties to the marriage had no access at any time when the child could have been begotten.
15. there is a concurrent finding of the trial court and the high court that there is no evidence to establish that perumal living in the same village as annapazham had no access to annapazham during the time when the plaintiff could have been begotten.
the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
