the judgment was delivered by hegde, j. :
notwithstanding anything contained in this act or in the principal act or in any judgment, decree or order of any court no assessment or re-assessment or collection of any tax due on any payment for admission to any entertainment or any cinematograph exhibition which has escaped assessment to tax, or which has been assessed at a rate lower than the rate at which it is assessable, under section 4 or 4-a of the principal act, made at any time after the date of the commencement of the principal act and before the date of the publication of this act in the fort st. george gazette shall be deemed to be invalid or ever to have been invalid on the ground only that such assessment or re-assessment or collection was not in accordance with law and such tax assessed or reassessed or collected or purporting to have been assessed or reassessed or collected, shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have been always validly assessed or reassessed or collected and accordingly -
(a) all acts, proceedings or things done or taken by the state government or by any officer of the state government or by any other authority in connection with the assessment or reassessment or collection of such tax, shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been done or taken in accordance with law;
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court against the state government or any person or authority whatsoever for the refund of any tax so paid; and
(c) no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any tax so paid.
this is a strange provision. prima facie that provision appears to command the corporation to refuse to refund the amount illegally collected despite the orders of this court and the high court. the state of gujarat was not well advised in introducing this provision. that provision attempts to make a direct inroad into the judicial powers of the state. the legislature under our constitution have within the prescribed limits, powers to make laws prospectively as well as retrospectively. by exercise of those powers, the legislature can remove the basis of a decision rendered by a competent court thereby rendering that decision ineffective. but no legislature in this country has power to ask the instrumentalities of the state to disobey or disregard the decision given by courts. the limits of the power of legislatures to interfere with the directions issued by courts were considered by several decisions of this court. in shri prithvi cotton mills ltd. v. the broach borough municipality, civil appeals nos. 2197 and 2198 of 1966, decided on april 25, 1969,
