the judgment was delivered by ray, c.j. :
in civil appeal no. 887 of 1975 the appellant is indira nehru gandhi and the respondent is raj narain. civil appeal no. 909 of 1975 is the cross objection of the respondent. on july 14, 1975 it was directed that both the appeals would be heard together. the appeals arise out of the judgment of the high court of allahabad dated june 12, 1975. the high court held that the appellant held that the appellant held herself out as a candidate from december 29, 1970 and was guilty of having committed corrupt practice by having obtained the assistance of gazetted officers in furtherance of her election prospects. the high court further found the appellant guilty of corrupt practice committed under section 123(7) of the

hereinafter referred to as the 1951 act by having obtained the assistance of yashpal kapur a gazetted officer for the furtherance of her election prospects. the high court held the appellant to be disqualified for a period of six years from the date of the order as provided in section 8(a) of the 1951 act. the high court awarded costs of the election petition to the respondent.
2. it should be stated here that this judgment disposes of both the appeals. under directions of this court the original record of the high court was called for. the appeal filed by the respondent with regard to issues nos. 2, 4, 6, 7 and 9 formed the subject-matter of cross objections in civil appeal no. 909 of 1975. the cross objections are the same which form grounds of appeal filed by the respondent in the high court at allahabad against an order of dismissal of civil misc. writ. no. 3761 of 1975 filed in the high court at allahabad.
3. the

contains three principal features. first, article 71 has been substituted by a new article 71. the new article 71 states that subject to the provisions of the

, parliament may by law regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election of a president or vice-president including the grounds on which such election may be questioned.

6. under the second clause the validity of any such law as is referred to in clause (1) and the decision of any authority or body under such law shall not be called in question in any court.
7. the third clause states that where any person is appointed as prime minister or, as the case may be, chosen to the office of the speaker of the house of the people, while an election petition referred to in article 329 (b) in respect of his election to either house of parliament or, as the case may be, to the house of the people is pending, such election petition shall abate upon such person being appointed as prime minister or, as the case may be, being chosen to the office of the speaker of the house of the people, but such election may be called in question under any such law as is referred to in clause (1).
8. the fourth clause which directly concern the present appeals states that no law made by parliament before the commencement of the

, in so far as it relates to election petitions and matters connected therewith, shall apply or shall be deemed ever to have applied to or in relation to the election of any such person as is referred to in clause (1), to either house of parliament and such election shall not be deemed to be void or ever to have become void on any ground on which such election could be declared to be void under any such law and notwithstanding any order made by any court, before such commencement, declaring such election to be void, such election to be void, such election continue to be valid in all respect and any such order and any finding on which such order is based shall be and shall be deemed always to have been void and of no effect.

, before the supreme court shall be disposed of in conformity with the provisions of clause (4).
10. the sixth clause states that the provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the

.
11. the third feature in the


after entry 86 and before the explanation several entries nos. 87 to 124 inclusive are inserted. the

, the

and the

are mentioned in entry 87.

and the

referred to as the

13. in view of the challenge by the respondent to the constitutional validity of the amendment acts, 1974 and 1975, notice was given to the attorney general.
14. the appeals were to be heard on august 11, 1975. in view of the constitutional (thirty-ninth amendment) act, 1975 which came into existence on august 10, 1975 the hearing was adjourned till august 25, 1975.
15. the constitutional validity of clause (4) of article 329a falls for consideration. clause (4) of article 329a is challenged on two grounds. first, it destroys or damages the basic features or basic structure of the constitution. reliance is placed in support of the contention on the majority view of seven learned judges in his holiness kesavananda bharati sripadagalavaru v. state of kerala.
21. the second ground is that the condition of the house which passed the

is illegal. it is said that a number of members of parliament of the two houses were detained by executive order after june 26, 1975. these persons were not supplied any grounds of detention or given any opportunity of making a representation against their detention. unless the president convenes a session of the full parliament by giving to all members thereof an opportunity to attend the session and exercise their right of speech and vote, the convening of the session will suffer from illegality and unconstitutionality and cannot be regarded as a session of the two houses of parliament. the mere fact that a person may be deprived of his right to move any court to secure his release from such illegal detention by means of a presidential order under article 359 does not render the detention itself either legal or constitutional. the important leaders of the house have been prevented from partic
23. the nature of the constituent power is legislative. the constituent power cannot exercise judicial power. exercise of judicial power or of a purely executive power is not power of amendment of the constitution. the constitution may be amended to change constitutional provisions but the constituent power cannot enact that a person is declared to be elected. the consequence of change of law may be that the decision given by a court under the law as it stood will not stand.
29. in america disputed elections are decided by the legislature. in taylor v. beckham the american supreme court held that a determination of an election contest for the office of the governor is a political question and is not justifiable. in truman h. newberry v. united states of america the american supreme court held that the manner of elections can be controlled. in david s. barry v. united states of america ex. rel. thomas w. cunninggham the decision of the american supreme court in charles w. baker v. joe c. carr was referred to in order to find out as to what aspects of elections would be justiciable and not a political question. in baker v. carr (supra) the delimitation of constituencies was held to be a justiciable issue. in julian bond v. james 'sloppy' floyd the exclusion of an elected representative because of his statement attacking the vietnam policy was held to be justiciable on the ground that it was not within the jurisdiction of the legislature to find out whether a member was sincere in
30. the american decisions show that if the house claims additional power to disqualify a member on the ground other than those stated in the constitution judicial review against disqualification would be available. in bond's case (supra) disqualification was on an unconstitutional ground that his statement on vietnam policy was a matter of free speech and expression. the court did not decide an election dispute but as a custodian of judicial power judged whether the house was acting within its power.
31. parliament itself can also hear election disputes. that was the english practice until the

when parliament conferred power on courts. before 1770, controverted elections were tried by the whole house of commons as party questions. the house found that the exercise of its privilege could be submitted to a tribunal constituted by law to secure impartiality in the administration of justice according to the laws of the land. in 1868 the jurisdiction of the house in the trial of controverted elections was transferred by statute to the courts of law. the present procedure is contained in the english representation of the people act, 1949. the trial is confided to judges selected from the judiciary. provision is made in each case for constituting a rota from whom these judges are selected. the house has no cognizance of these proceedings until their determination when the judges are to make a purpose. trial is not a proceeding of the house. the judges certify their determination, in writing,
32. judicial review in many matters under statute may be excluded. in many cases special jurisdiction is created to deal with matters assigned to such authorities. a special forum is even created to hear election disputes. a right of appeal may be conferred against such decision. if parliament acts as the forum for determination of election disputes it may be a question of parliamentary privilege and the courts may not entertain any review from such decisions. that is because the exercise of power by the legislature in determining disputed elections may be called legislative power. a distinction arises between what can be called legislative power. a distinction arises between what can be called the traditional judicial determination by courts and tribunals on the one hand and the peculiar jurisdiction by the legislature in determining controverted elections on the other.
34. the general norm which attaches abstractly determined consequences, has to be applied to concrete cases in order that the sanction determined in abstract may be ordered and executed in concrete. the two essential elements of judicial functions are to apply a pre-existing general norm in which a certain consequence is attached to certain conditions. the existence of the concrete conditions in connection with the concrete consequence are what may be called individualization of the general and abstract norm to the individual norm of the judicial decision.

36. abeyesekera's case (supra) is an authority for the proposition that the legal infirmity can be removed and active indemnity can be passed to relieve from penalties incurred.
37. in piare dusadh's case (supra) the special criminal courts (repeal) ordinance, 1943 which conferred validity and full effectiveness on sentences passed by special courts which functioned under the special criminal courts ordinance, 1942 was challenged. it was argued in piare dusadh's case that the 1943 ordinance attempted to exercise judicial power. the federal court did not accept the contention on the ground that in india the legislature has enacted laws providing that suits which had been dismissed on a particular view of the law must be restored and retried. our federal court said that parliament simply takes up certain determinations which exist in fact, though made without authority, and prescribes not that they shall be acts done by a board of review, but that they shall be treated as they would be treated if they were such acts. the sections do not constitute an exercise of the judicial power. the legislature had not attempted to decide the question of the guilt or innocence of any of the accused
40. where invalid elections declared by reason of corrupt practices have been validated by changing the definition of corrupt practices in the

41. our federal court in basanta chandra ghose v. king emperor, dealt with the validity and effect of ordinance no. 3 of 1944. one of the objects of that ordinance was to enact a presumption in the ordinance itself in favour of detention orders to preclude their being questioned in courts of law and to take away or limit the power of the high court to make orders under section 491 of the criminal procedure code. the third object of the ordinance was challenged on the ground that section 10(2) of the ordinance which provided that if at the commencement there is pending in any court any proceeding by which the validity of an order having effect by virtue of section 6 as if it had been made under this ordinance is called in question, that proceeding is hereby discharged. section 10(2) of the ordinance was challenged on the ground that this was in abrogation of judicial power by legislative authority. it was said that the legislative authority only passed the law and the disposal of the particular case could rem
42. on behalf of the respondent contended that the constituent power could deal with amendments of the constitution, but could not exercise constituent power in relation to validating an election.
44. in bond's case (supra) the house claimed additional power to disqualify a member on grounds other than those stated in the constitution. it was conceded there as it will appear at page 244 of the report that judicial review against the disqualification decreed by the house would be available if a member was excluded on racial ground or other unconstitutional grounds. the house claimed that the ground on which bond was disqualified was not an unconstitutional ground. the court held that there was no distinction between a disqualification decreed by the house on racial grounds and one alleged to violate the right of free speech. the court concluded that bond was deprived of his constitutional rights guaranteed by the first amendment by the disqualification decreed by the house. this was not a case of deciding an election dispute by the house and the court sitting on appeal on the decision of the house. this is a case where a disqualification was imposed on unconstitutional grounds, thereby affecting the fu
45. the case of powell v. mccormack (supra) is also one of disqualification by the house of a congressman on the basis of qualification which the house added to those specified in the constitution. in other words, the house purported to unseat a member by disqualifying him on a ground not given in the constitution. this was not a case of deciding an election dispute. under the statute in question the federal district court had jurisdiction over all civil actions where controversy arises under the constitution. this was a case entertained on the ground that exclusion of a member of the house was unconstitutional. this case is an authority for the proposition that if a power is committed to a particular organ, the court cannot adjudicate upon it. where a power is exercised by one organ, which is not committed to that particular organ of the state and such exercise of power is violative of a constitutional provision the mater becomes cognizable by courts. the court held that a question of unconstitutional exclu

55. decision in election disputes may be made by the legislature itself or may be made by courts or tribunals on behalf of the legislature or may be made by courts and tribunals on their own exercising judicial functions. the concept of free and fair election is worked out by the

57. at the outset it has to be noticed that constituent power is not the same as ordinary law-making power. on behalf of the appellant it was rightly contended that if any amendment of article 102(1) (e) of the

had to be made, it had to be made by amendment of the constitution. the matter does not rest there.
58. if no law prior to the

will apply to election petitions or matters connected therewith the result is that there is not only no forum for adjudication of election disputes but that there is also no election petition in the eye of law. the insurmountable difficulty is in regard to the process and result of validating the election by clause (4). two answers were given on behalf of the appellant. one was that the validation of the election is itself the law. the other was that the constituent power applied its own norms to the election petition. both the answers are unacceptable. if the election petition itself did not have any existence in law there was no petition which could be looked into by the constituent power. if there was no petition to look into it is difficult to comprehend as to what norms were applied to the election dispute. the dispute has to be seen. the dispute has to be adjudicated upon.
59. clause (4) suffers from these infirmities. first, the forum might be changed but another forum has to be created. if the constituent power became itself the forum to decide the disputes the constituent power by repealing the law in relation to election petitions and matters connected therewith did not have any petition to seize upon to deal with the same. secondly, any decision is to be made in accordance with law. parliament has power to create law and apply the same. in the present case, the constitutent power did not have any law to apply to the case, because the previous law did not apply and no other law was applied by clause (4). the validation of the election in the present case is, therefore, not by applying any law and it, therefore, offends rule of law.
60. it is true that no express mention is made in our constitution of vesting the judiciary the judicial power as is to be found in the american constitution. but a division of the three main functions of government is recognised in our constitution. judicial power in the sense of the judicial power of the state is vested in the judiciary. similarly, the executive and the legislature are vested with powers in their spheres. judicial power has lain in the hands of the judiciary prior to the constitution and also since the constitution. it is not the intention that the powers of the judiciary should be passed to or be shared by the executive or the legislature or that the powers of the legislature or the executive should pass to or be shared by the judiciary.
64. clause (5) in article 329a states that an appeal against any order of any court referred to in clause (4) pending, before the commencement of the

, before the supreme court, shall be disposed of in conformity with the provisions of clause (4). the appeal cannot be disposed of in conformity with the provisions of clause 4 inasmuch as the validation of the election cannot rest on clause (4).
66. the second contention of the respondent is that the session of the lok sabha and the rajya sabha is invalid for these reasons. if the executive illegally and unconstitutionally detains any person the detention affects the validity of the proceedings. a number of members of parliament of the two houses, namely, the lok sabha and the rajya sabha were detained by executive orders after june 26, 1975 and before the summoning of a session of the two houses of parliament. parliament commenced the session on july 21, 1975. none of the members of parliament were either supplied any grounds of detention or given any opportunity to make any representation against their detention. the president who was the authority to summon a session of parliament issued the presidential order under article 359 of the constitution on june 27, 1975. the right of the detained members of parliament to move any court for the enforcement of their fundamental right under article 22 of the constitution was taken away by the executive or
70. in bradlaugh v. gossett bradlaugh claimed to make affirmation instead of taking the oath. he was permitted to make the affirmation "subject to any liability by statute", and took his seat. upon an action for penalties it was decided, finally by the house of lords, that bradlaugh had not qualified himself to sit by making the affirmation. on re-election, he attempted to take the oath, but was prevented by order of the house which eventually directed the sergeant to exclude him from the house until he undertook to create no further disturbance. bradlaugh then brought an action against the sergeant in order to obtain a

. it was held that the court had no power to restrain the executive officer of the house from carrying out the order of the house. the reason is that the house is not subject to the contro
71. if an outside agency illegally prevents a member's participation the house has the power to secure his presence. in 1543 ferrers a member was arrested in london. the house, on hearing of his arrest, ordered the sergeant to go to the computer and demand his delivery. the sergeant was resisted by the city officers, who were protected by the sheriffs. the commons laid their case before the lords. they ordered the sergeant to repair to the sheriffs, and to require the delivery of ferrers without any writ or warrant. the lord chancellor had offered them a writ of privilege but they refused it. the sheriffs in the meantime had surrendered the prisoner. this practice of releasing members by a writ of privilege continued but no writ was to be obtained.
72. the present mode of releasing arrested members goes back to shirley's case. in 1603 shirley was imprisoned in the fleet, in execution, before the meeting of parliament. the commons first tried to bring him into the house by habeas corpus, and then sent the sergeant to demand his release. the warden refused to give up his prisoner. at length the warden delivered up the prisoner.
73. an act 1 james 1, c. 13 was passed, which while it recognised the privilege of freedom from arrest, the right of either house of parliament to set a privileged person at liberty, and the right to punish those who make or procure arrests, enacted that after such time as the privilege of that session in which privilege is granted shall cease, parties may sue and execute a new writ. in 1700 an act was passed which while it maintained the privilege of freedom from arrest with more distinctness than the act i james 1 c. 13, made the goods of privileged persons liable to distress infinite and sequestration, between a dissolution or prorogation and the next meeting of parliament, and during adjournments for more than fourteen days.
76. when under article 359 the president during the operation of a proclamation of emergency by order declares that the right to move any court for the enforcement of rights conferred by part iii shall remain suspended and persons who are members of house of parliament are in detention under orders made under the

, the detention cannot be challenged by collateral attack on the ground of deprivation of their participation in the parliamentary proceedings. the challenge will be questioning the detention on the ground that the detention is in violation of article 19, 21 and 22.
77. article 85 provides that not more than six months shall intervene between the two sessions of parliament. article 85 is not a provision regarding the constitution of parliament but of holding of sessions. the powers, privileges and immunities of parliament and its members as provided in article 105 are that they shall be such as may be defined by parliament by law, and, until so defined, shall be those of the house of commons of the parliament of the united kingdom.
78. in special reference no. 1 of 1964, it was held that the court could entertain a petition under article 226 on the ground that the imposition of penalty by the legislature on a person who is not a member of the legislature or issuing process against such person for its contempt committed outside the four walls of the house.
79. the scope of the parliamentary privilege of freedom from arrest has been defined positively and negatively. the positive aspect of the privilege is expressed in the claim of the commons to freedom from arrest in all civil actions or suits during the time of parliament and during the period when a member was journeying or returning from parliament. the privilege has been defined negatively in the claim of the commons which specifically excepted treason, felony and breach or surety of the peace.
80. the privilege of freedom from arrest is limited to civil cause, and has not been allowed to interfere with the administration of criminal justice or emergency legislation. (see may's parliamentary practice, 18th ed., at p. 100). in early times the distinction between "civil" and "criminal" was not clearly expressed. the development of the privilege has shown a tendency to confine it more narrowly to cases of a civil character and to exclude not only every kind of criminal case, but also cases which, while not strictly criminal, partake more of a criminal than of a civil character. this development is in conformity with he principle laid down by the commons in a conference with the lords in 1641 :

81. in wilkes' case, it was resolved by both houses on november 29, 1763 that the privilege of parliament does not extend to the case of writing and publishing seditious libels, nor ought to be allowed to obstruct the ordinary course of the laws in the speedy and effectual prosecution of so heinous and dangerous an offence."since that time", the committee of privileges said in 1831,

83. the committal of a member in england for high treason or any criminal offence is brought before the house by a letter addressed to the speaker by the committing judge or magistrate. where a member is convicted but released on bail pending an appeal, the duty of the magistrate to communicate with the speaker does not arise. no duty of informing the speaker arises in the case of a person who while in prison under sentence of a court is elected as a member of parliament. in the case of detention of members under regulation 14b of the defence of realm regulations in england, the communication was made to the speaker by a letter from the chief secretary to the lord lieutenant of ireland which was read to the house by the speaker. the detention of a member under regulation 18b of the defence (general) regulations, 1939, made under the

and 1940, led to the committee of privileges being directed to consider whether such detention constituted a breach of the privileges of the
84. in k. anandan nambiar v. chief secretary, government of madras, the petitioner who were members of parliament and detained by orders passed by the state government under rule 30 (1) (b) of the defence of india rules, 1962 challenged the validity of the orders of detention on the ground that rule 30(1) (b) was not valid because

. the state raised a preliminary objection that the petitions were incompetent in view of the order issued by the president under article 359(1) suspending the rights of any person to move any court for the enforcement of rights conferred by articles 14, 21 and 22. this court held that the validity of the act, rule or order made under the presidential order could not be questioned on the ground that they contravene articles 14, 21 and 22.
85. the petitioners also contended in nambiar's case (supra) that rule 30(1) (b) under which the orders of detention had been passed was invalid on grounds other than those based on articles 14, 19, 21 and 22. this court held that if that plea was well-founded, the last clause of the presidential order was not satisfied, and, therefore, the bar created by it suspending the citizen's fundamental rights under articles 14, 21 and 22 could not be pressed into service by the respondents.
86. articles 79, 85, 86, 100(1) and 105(3) were considered in nambiar's case (supra) in relation to rights of members of parliament, and it was held that the totality of rights cannot claim the status of fundamental rights and freedom of speech on which reliance was placed is a part of the privileges falling under article 105. the reason is that freedom from arrest under a detention order is not recognised as a privilege which can be claimed by members of house of commons in england. this court then posed the question that if a claim for freedom from arrest by a detention order could not be sustained under the privileges of the members of parliament whether it could be sustained on the ground that it is a constitutional right which could not be sustained on the ground that it is constitutional right which could not be contravened. the statement in may's parliamentary practice 7th ed. at p. 78 which is to be found in the 18th edition at p. 100 that the privilege of freedom from arrest is limited to civil caus
87. the second ground of challenge that there was no valid session of the house cannot be accepted for the reasons given above. it has also to be stated that it is not open to the respondent to challenge the orders of detention collaterally. the principle is that what is directly forbidden cannot be indirectly achieved.
88. the high court found first that the appellant has to be regarded as a candidate from december 29, 1970 as she held herself out on that date as a candidate. the second finding is that the appellant obtained and procured the assistance of yashpal kapur for the furtherance of her election prospects when yashpal kapur was serving as a gazetted officer with the government of india. the high court found that yashpal kapur's resignation from his service though submitted on january 13, 1971 did not become effective until january 25, 1971 when it was notified. the further finding by the high court is that yashpal kapur under the instructions of the appellant delivered election speech on january 7, 1971 at munshi ganj and another speech at kalan on january 19, 1971. the third finding by the high court is that the appellant and her election agent yashpal kapur procured and obtained the assistance of the officers of the state government, particularly, the district magistrate, the superintendent of police, the execut
89. the definition of "candidate" in section 79(b) of the 1951 act until the amendment thereof by the

was as follow :
'candidate' means a person who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate at any election and any such person shall be deemed to have been a candidate as from the time when, with the election in prospect, he began to hold himself out as a prospective candidate.
90. this definition has now been substituted by section 7 of the amendment act, 1975, as follows :
'candidate' means a person who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate at any election.
91. section 10 of the amendment act, 1975 further enacted that the amendments shall have retrospective operation so as to apply to and in relation to any election held before the commencement of the amendment act, 1975 on august 6, 1975 to either house of parliament or to either house or the house of the legislature of a state, inter alia, (iv) in respect of which appeal from any order of any high court made in any election petition under section 98 or section 99 of the 1951 act is pending before the supreme court immediately before such commencement.
92. section 9 of the amendment act, 1975 has substituted clause (a) in section 171 a of the


a person who has been nominated as a candidate at any election. previously the definition of "candidate" in section 171a of the

was the same as in section 79(b) of the 1951 act prior to the amendment thereof by the amendment act, 1975. in section 171a of the

there was a proviso to the effect that candidate would mean a person who holds himself out as a prospective candidate provided he is subsequently nominated as a candidate.
93. relying on the provisions introduced by the amendment act, 1975, it is contended on behalf of the appellant that she will be regarded as a candidate only from february 1, 1971, namely, the date when she has been duly nominated as a candidate at her election, and, therefore, the finding of the high court cannot be sustained. it is also contended by the appellant that the finding of the high court that yashpal kapur delivered election speeches on january 7, 1971 and january 19, 1971 under instructions of the appellant cannot be supported because the appellant was not a candidate either on january 7, 1971 or on january 19, 1971.
94. the second finding by the high court with regard to the resignation of yashpal kapur not to be effective until january 25, 1971 is contended to be displaced by legislative change by the amendment act, 1975. section 8(b) of the amendment act, 1975 has introduced explanation (3) at the end of section 123(7) of the 1951 act. this amendment has retrospective operation.

96. the effect of explanation (3) at the end of section 123(7) of the 1951 act incorporated by the notification dated january 25, 1971 in the gazette dated february 6, 1971 makes the fact of the resignation of yashpal kapur from his service fully effective from january 14, 1971. it is, therefore, contended that from january 14, 1971 yashpal kapur was not a government servant.
97. to constitute a corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123 (7) of the 1951 act the act complained of must be an act of obtaining or procuring os assistance of the categories of government servants mentioned therein by the candidate or his election agent or by any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent. section 100(1) (b) of the 1951 act enacts that if the high court is of opinion that any corrupt practice has been committed by a returned candidate or his election agent or by any other person with the consent of a returned candidate or his election agent, the high court shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void. a returned candidate is defined in section 79(f) of the 1951 act to mean a candidate whose name has been published under section 67 of the 1951 act as duly elected. a returned candidate in order to be guilty of a corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123(7) of the 1951 act must be guilty of any of the acts mentioned in the differ

99. the proviso aforesaid shows that where persons in the service of the government in the discharge of official duty make any arrangement or provide any facility or do any act or thing in relation to a candidate, such arrangements and facilities shall not be deemed to be assistance for furtherance of the prospect of the candidate's election. therefore, the service rendered by government servants for construction of rostrums and arrangements for supply of power for loudspeakers according to the contention of the appellant could not be considered as assistance for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of the appellant.
100. the contentions of the appellant can succeed if the amendment acts of 1974 and 1975 are valid. the respondent has challenged the constitutional validity of these acts. therefore, that question has to be examined before the appellant's contentions can be answered.
101. the respondent in cross-appeal challenged the findings of the high court on issue no. 9 and contended that the high court should have held that the election expenses of the appellant exceeded the limit. the respondent also challenged the finding of the high court with regard to issue no. 6 and contended that the high court should have held that the symbol of cow and calf was a religious symbol and the appellant committed corrupt practice as defined in section 123(3) of the 1951 act. the respondent did not press issues no. 4 and 5 which related to distribution of quilts, blankets, dhotis and liquor. the respondent also abandoned issue no. 7 which related to voters being conveyed to the polling stations free of charge on vehicles hired and procured by yashpal kapur.
102. the issue pressed by the respondent was that the appellant and her election agent yashpal kapur incurred or authorised expenditure in excess of the amount prescribed by section 77 of the 1951 act read with rule 90. the respondent alleged that the election expenses of the appellant, inter alia, were rs. 1, 28, 700 on account of hiring charges of vehicles, rs. 43, 230 on account of cost of petrol and diesel; rs. 9, 900 on account payments made to the drivers of the vehicles. the respondent further alleged that the appellant spent rs. 1, 32, 000 on account of construction of rostrums for public meetings on february 1, 1971 and february 25, 1971. the respondent contended that the findings of the high court should be reversed.
103. the high court found that the election expenses furnished by the appellant were rs. 12, 892.97. the high court added another sum of rs. 18, 183.50. the three items which were added by the high court were cost of erection of rostrums amounting to rs. 16, 000, cost incurred in installation of loudspeakers amounting to rs. 1, 951 and cost for providing car transport to respondent no. 1 amounting to rs. 232.50. the total election expenses found by the high court came to rs. 31, 976.47 which was below the prescribed limit of rs. 35, 000.
104. with regard to hiring charges of vehicles the high court found that the respondent did not examine any witness to indicate as to whether the vehicles were used only for party propaganda or they were used in connection with the election of the appellant. the high court further found that the documents which were relied on by the respondent did not establish that the vehicles had been engaged or used in connection with the election work of the appellant.
105. the respondent repeated the following contentions which had been advanced before the high court. dal bahadur singh, president, district congress committee wrote a letter to the district election officer intimating that 23 vehicles had been engaged by the district congress committee for election work in rae bareli, amethi and ram sanehi ghat constituencies, and, therefore, the vehicles should be derequisitioned. dal bahadur singh thereafter wrote a note to yashpal kapur and requested that the letter be sent to the district election officer to that effect. yashpal kapur wrote a letter to the district election officer and repeated the prayer contained in dal bahadur singh's letter. it was, therefore, contended that because yashpal kapur was the election agent of the appellant and he moved for the derequisition of the vehicles it should be inferred that the vehicles were engaged for the election of the appellant. yaspal kapur said that the vehicles were used in the three parliamentary constituencies. the hi
106. with regard to the expenses for the election of rostrums the respondent contended that the appellant's election expenses should include rs. 1, 32, 000 as the costs for erection of rostrums for the meetings on february 1, 1971 and the meeting on february 25, 1971. the high court held that rs. 16, 000 could only be added to the election expenses of the appellant consisting of rs. 6, 400 for four rostrums and rs. 9, 600 for six rostrums.
107. the amount of rs. 16, 000 which was added by the high court on account of cost of erection of rostrums cannot be included in the election expenses of the appellant by reason of amendment to section 77 of the 1951 act by the amendment act, 1975. explanation 3 has been added as follows :

108. by the amendment act, 1975 a proviso has been added to section 123(7) of the 1951 act to the effect that arrangements made or facilities provided or any act done by a government servant belonging to the class mentioned there in the discharge of official duty shall not be deemed to be assistance for furtherance of the prospects of that candidate's election. all these amendments have retrospective operation. therefore, the cost of rostrums cannot be added to the election expenses of the appellant. services rendered by government servants for the erection of rostrums and for supply of power for loudspeakers cannot be deemed to be assistance for the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate's election.
109. the respondent contended that exhibit 118 which was the bank account of the district congress committee showed on the one hand that there was deposit of rs. 69, 930 on march 4, 1971 and on the other there was a withdrawal of rs. 40, 000 on march 4, 1971 and of rs. 25, 000 on march 6, 1971, and, therefore, the sum of rs. 65, 000 should be added to the election expenses of the appellant. when it was put to yashpal kapur that the sums of rs. 40, 000 and rs. 25, 000 were withdrawn by dal bahadur singh, yashpal kapur said that he was not aware of it. there is no pleading in the election petition that the appellant authorised incurring expenditure by a political party. there is no pleading that any amount has been paid by the political party. there is no complaint in the petition about the sum of rs. 65, 000 or the sum of rs. 69, 930. yashpal kapur denied knowledge of rs. 70, 000. the appellant was not asked a single question. there is no evidence to identify any of these payments with the election of the appellant.
110. it is appropriate at this stage to refer to the amendment which was introduced by the amendment act, 1974. the appellant relies on the provision to show that expenses incurred or authorised by a political party cannot be included in election expenses. explanation 1 which was inserted at the end of section 77 of the 1951 act by amendment act, 1974 is that any expenditure incurred or authorised in connection with the election of a candidate by a political party or by any other association or body of persons or by an individual other than the candidate or his election agent shall not be deemed to be and shall not ever be deemed to have been expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorised by the candidate or by his election agent.
111. a proviso was also added to the aforesaid explanation 1 by the amendment act, 1974. the proviso stated that nothing contained in the explanation shall effect (a) any judgment, order or decision of the supreme court whereby the election of a candidate to the house of the people or to the legislative assembly of a state has been declared void or set aside before the commencement of the representation of the people (amendment) ordinance, 1974; (b) any judgment, order or decision of high court whereby the election of any such candidate has been declared void or set aside before the commencement of the said ordinance if no appeal has been preferred to the supreme court against such judgment, order or decision of the high court before such commencement and the period of limitation for filing such appeal has expired before such commencement.
112. explanation 2 which was added to section 77 of the 1951 act by the amendment act, 1974 is as follows :
for the purposes of explanation 1 "political party" shall have the same meaning as in the election symbols (reservation and allotment) order, 1968, as for the time being in force.
113. counsel for the respondent relied on the recent decision of this court in kanwar lal gupta v. amaranth chawla in support of the proposition that there has been no change in law and if expenses incurred by a political party can be identified with the election of a candidate then that expenditure is to be added to the election expenses of a candidate as being authorised by him. there are no findings by the high court in the present appeals that any expenses by a political party were authorised by the appellant. there is also no finding in the present appeals that any expenses incurred by a political party can be identified with the election of the appellant. the changes in law affected by the amendment acts, 1974 and 1975 totally repel the submissions on behalf of the respondent. expenses incurred or authorised in connection with the election of a candidate by a political party shall not be deemed to be and shall not ever be deemed to have been expenditure in connection with the election incurred or autho
114. counsel for the respondent contended that the judgment of the high court should be reversed with regard to election expenses of the appellant on three counts. first, exhibit 118 shows that the sum of rs. 65, 000 which was drawn by congress committee should have been held by the high court on a reasonable inference to have been spent by the district congress committee as having been authorised by the election agent of the appellant. second, the high court has not taken into account expenses of the election agent at 12 meetings other than the meetings addressed by the appellant and has also not taken into account the telephone expense of the election agent. the telephone expenses amounted to rs. 836.85 between january 11, 1971 and february 10, 1971 and a further sum of rs. 2, 514 for the period february 11, 1971 to march 15, 1971. third, it is said that there were 5000 polling booths and if 20 workers were required per booth then 10, 000 workers would be required and the only inference is that an amount in e
115. in issue no. 9 there was no amount alleged with regard to telephones bills or election meetings under the heading of alleged election expenses. there was no allegation to that effect in the petition. with regard to expenses for the alleged 12 meetings addressed by the election agent the evidence of yashpal kapur is that he addressed about a dozen meetings and he did not include in the election return the expenses incurred for installation of loudspeakers because the expenditure was incurred by him. he also said that he did not include in the election return the expenses incurred over the construction of platforms because the meetings were arranged by the district congress committee. no allegations were made in the petition with regard to any alleged sum of money on account of election meetings where the election agent spoke. the high court rightly said that the telephone expenses and expenses for meetings could not be taken into consideration because no suggestion of the case was made until the stage of
116. the respondent's submission is that the appellant was the prime minister at the time of the election, and, therefore, there was a big campaign and the expenses were enormous. that will mean little. expenses incurred or authorised by a political party are under the amendment act, 1974 not to be deemed to be expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorised by the candidate or by his election agent for the purposes of section 77 of the 1951 act. the part played by a political party in connection with candidates of the party at the election particularly in relation to expenditure incurred by the political party with regard to candidates of the party has been the subject of some decisions of this court. this court has observed that expenditure must be by the candidate himself and any expenditure in his interest by others (not his agent within the meaning of the term of the election laws) is not be taken note of. where vehicles were engaged by the congress committee and used by the candidate
117. expenses incurred by a political party in support of its candidates have been held by this court not to fall within the mischief of section 123 (6) of the 1951 act (see shah jayantilal ambalal v. kasturilal nagindas doshi). in rananjaya singh v. baijnath singh this court pointed out that expenses must be incurred or authorised by the candidate or his agent. in that case the manager, the assistant manager, 20 ziladars and their peons were alleged to have worked for the election of the appellant. this court held that the employment of extra persons and the incurring or authorising of extra expenditure was not by the candidate or his election agent. the extra men employed and paid were in the employment of the father of the appellant. this court said that the position in law could not be at all different if the father had given those employees a holiday on full pay and they voluntarily worked in connection with the election of the appellant. persons who volunteer to work cannot be said to be employed or pa
118. in ram dayal v. brijraj singh the appellant challenged the election of the respondent on the ground that the maharaja and the rajmata of gwalior had helped the respondent's election in a number of ways and acted as his agents and the respondent incurred considerable expenditure which exceeded the limit. this court found that assuming the expenditure was incurred by the maharaja and the rajmata of gwalior for the purpose of canvassing votes, in the absence of any evidence to show that the maharaja and the rajmata acted as election agents or that the expenditure was authorised by the respondent, it was not liable to be included in the election expenses.
119. on the behalf of the respondent it was said relying on the decision of this court in kanwar lal gupta's case (supra) that if the candidate takes advantage of expenditure incurred by the political party in connection with the election of the candidate or participates in the programme of activity or fails to disavow the expenditure the candidate cannot escape the rigour of the ceiling by saying that he has not incurred the expenditure but his political party has done so. expenditure incurred by a political party in connection with the election of the candidates of the party is not a part of the election expenses of the candidate. similarly, participation in the programme of activity organised by a political party will not fall within the election expenses of the candidate of the party. a candidate is not required to disavow or denounce the expenditure incurred or authorised by the political party because the expenditure is neither incurred nor authorised by the candidate. one can disavow what would be asc
120. the decision in kanwar lal gupta's case (supra) was based on observation extracted from the decision of this court in maghraj patodia v. r. k. birla. in maghraj patodia's case (supra) the allegations were that the respondent had been put up by one of the wealthiest business houses in the country which owned or controlled a large number of companies and during the election campaign vast material and human resources of these companies were drawn upon by the respondent. this court dismissed the appeal on the ground that the appellant had failed to establish that expenditure in excess of the prescribed limit was incurred by the respondent. in maghraj patodia's case there is an observation that expenses incurred by a political party to advance to the prospects of the candidates put up by it without more do not fall within section 77 of the 1951 act. the words "something more" were constructed by counsel for the respondent to mean that if a candidate takes advantage of the expenditure incurred or authorised b
121. allegations that election expenses are incurred or authorised by a candidate or his agent will have to be proved. authorisation means acceptance of the responsibility. authorisation must precede the expenditure. authorisation means reimbursement by the candidate or election agent of the person who has been authorised by the candidate or by the election agent of the candidate to spend or incur. in order to constitute authorisation the effect must be that the authority must carry with it the right of reimbursement.
