the judgment was delivered by khanna, j. :
(bombay act 59 of 1949) (hereinafter referred to as the corporations act) as amended by gujarat acts no. 8 of 1968 and no. 5 of 1970 arise for determination in these appeals and the connected writ petitions. the corporations act was enacted by the bombay legislature in december, 1949 for the establishment of municipal corporations in the cities of ahmedabad and poona. it was applied to ahmedabad on july 1, 1950.
2. the assessment of properties to property tax in ahmedabad was made under the corporations act by making entries in the assessment books in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the
set out in chapter viii of schedule a of the corporations act. a separate section of the assessment book was prepared by the commissioner of the corporation for each official year in respect of the assessment of property tax on certain kinds of properties like textile mills, factories and buildings of university. these properties were classified as special properties. the rateable value of properties included in the special property section was previously determined on flat rate for every 100 sq. ft. of the floor area. in arriving at the figure of the rateable value, the plants and machinery situate upon lands and buildings were also taken into account as provided in clauses (2) and (3) of rule 7 of the
. there was some increase in the rateable value fixed by the commissioner for the years 1964-65 and 1965-66. the commissioner also made initial entries in assessment book in respect of those properties for the year 1966-67. a number of writ petitions under article 32 of the
were field in this court challenging the validity of the assessment for the years 1964-65 and 1965-66 as well as the initial entries for the year 1966-67. those writ petitions were disposed of by this court by a judgment delivered on february 21, 1967 and reported as new manek chowk spinning &amp; weaving mills co. ltd. v. municipal corporation of the city of ahmedabad (
to make a law for taxing machinery. rule 7(2) was held to be beyond the legislative competence of the state. rules 7(2) and (3) were also held to be invalid on account of excessive delegation of powers by the legislature. under those rules the specification of the classes of machinery for the purpose of taxation was to be made by the commissioner with the approval of the corporation irrespective of the question as to where they were to be found. this court found that it depended upon the arbitrary will of the commissioner as to what machinery he would specify and what he would not that he was the only person who could examine this question as there was no right of appeal. dealing with the method of levy of tax on the basis of the floor area, this court observed that it was against the provisions of the act and the rules made thereunder and that it had not been shown that conditions perquisite for determination of the annual value on that basis had existed at the relevant time. the above method of taxation on the basis of floor area, it was held, was violative of article 14 of the
as it would in the absence of the classification of factories on any rational basis give rise to inequalities.
3. although the supreme court directed the corporation to prepare fresh assessment lists relating to properties in the special property section for the official years 1964-65, 1965-67, the corporation was unable to do so in view of the decision of the high court in the case of ahmedabad municipality v. keshavlal (6 glr 228 :
4. the ahmedabad corporation, it may be stated, used to pass a resolution under section 99 of the corporations act determining the rate at which property tax would be levied for the particular official year. so far as conservancy tax was concerned, the rate determined by the corporation was 3 per cent. a special rate of conservancy tax of 7 1/2 per cent was, however, fixed by the corporation for the official year up to 1966-67 for hotels, clubs, stables, theatres or cinemas or other large premises including mills and factories registered under the
and where fifty or more workmen were employed in manufacture for all the shifts. for the official year 1967-68 the corporation determined the rate of conservancy tax to be 3 per cent and a special rate of 9 per cent for the large premises mentioned above. the rate of general tax for ordinary property was fixed on a graduated scale but on properties used by textile mills the rate was uniform at 30 per cent. the powers of the commissioner under the
were entrusted to the deputy municipal commissioner by virtue of an office order issued under section 49(1). the deputy commissioner thereafter determined the rateable value of the lands and buildings of the petitioners. the petitioners preferred appeals against the order of the deputy commissioner determining the amount of property tax to the chief judge of the court of small causes, ahmedabad. the chief judge was, however, precluded from hearing those appeals since the amount of tax was not deposited by the petitioners as required by section 406(2)(e) of the corporation act. the petitioners thereafter field petitions on the high court challenging the validity of the assessments made by the deputy municipal commissioner for the official years 1966-67, 1967-68 and 1968-69. those writ petitions were allowed by the gujarat high court as per judgment dated october 27, 1969. it was held that section 49 of the corporations act did not contemplate delegation of judicial or quasi-judicial powers by the municipal commissioner under taxation rule 18 and that disposal of complaints by the deputy commissioner was not possible. the high court also declared section 406(2) (e) violative of articles 14. part of rule 42 which related to destroys or attachment for default in payment of tax was also struck down on the ground that it could not stand independently of section 406(2)(e). the fixation of special rate of 9 per cent for conservancy tax in respect of large premises including mills and factories was also held to be illegal and void.
5. the official year 1969-70 having in the meantime commenced, the municipal commissioner adopted under taxation rule 21 the entries of the official year 1968-69 as the entries for the official year 1969-70. complaints were then filed by the petitioners against the amount of rateable value entered in the assessment books. during the pendency of those complaints, the governor of gujarat promulgated ordinance no. 6 of 1969 on december 23, 1969. the ordinance was replaced by gujarat act no. 5 of 1970 which came into force with effect from march 31, 1970. the ordinance amended the definition of rateable value as well as section 49 with retrospective effect. it also contained certain validating provisions. gujarat act 5 of 1970 was on the line of ordinance no. 6 of 1969, except in the matter of definition of rateable value. a number of petitions in the meantime were field to challenge the validity of the provisions of ordinance no. 6 of 1969 and act 5 of 1970.
6. for the official year 1970-71, the valuation was made in accordance with gujarat act 5 of 1970. a number of writ petitions were filed before the gujarat high court challenging the provisions of gujarat act 5 of 1970 as well as the valuation for the year 1970-71.
7. in the meantime, on april 17, 1970 appeal field by the corporation against judgment dated july 3, 1969 of gujarat high court was dismissed by this court. the decision of this was given in municipal corporation of the city of ahmedabad v. new shrock spg. &amp; wvg. co. ltd. (
for the purpose of sub-section (1) of section 127 property taxes shall comprise the following taxes which shall, subject to the exceptions, limitations and conditions hereinafter provided, be levied on buildings and lands in the city.
(a) .. .. ..
(b) a conservancy tax at such percentage of their rateable value as will in the opinion of the corporation suffice to provide for the collection, removal and disposal, by municipal agency, of all excrementitious and polluted matter from privies, urinals and cess-pools and for efficiently maintaining and repairing the municipal drains constructed or used for the reception or conveyance of such matter; subject however to the provisos that the minimum amount of such tax to be levied in respect of any one building or of any one portion of a building which is let as separate holding shall be eight annas per mensem and that the amount of such tax to be levied in respect of any hotel, club or other large premises may be specially fixed under section 137 :(c) a general tax of not less than twelve per cent of their rateable value, which may be levied, if the corporation so determines, on a graduated scale :
provided .. .. ..
(1) the commissioner may, whenever he thinks fit, fix the conservancy tax to be paid in respect of any hotel, club, stable or other large premises at such special rate as shall be generally approved by the standing committee in this behalf, whether the service in respect of which such tax is leviable be performed by human labour or by substituted means or appliances.
(2) in the case of premises used solely for public purpose and not used or intended to be used for purposes of profit or for residential or charitable or religious purpose in respect of which the conservancy tax is payable by the government the commissioner shall fix the said tax at a special rate special rate approved as aforesaid.
(3) in any such case the amount of the conservancy tax shall be fixed with reference to the cost or probable cost of the collection, removal and disposal, by the agency of municipal conservancy staff, of excrementitious and polluted matter from the premises.
section 150 relates to supplementary taxation. clause (1) of section 49 enables a deputy municipal commissioner, subject to the orders of the commissioner, to exercise such of the powers and perform such of the duties of the commissioner as the commissioner shall from time to time depute to him. section 406 deals with appeals. according to clause (1) of section 406, subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, appeals against any rateable value or tax fixed or charged under the act shall be heard and determined by the judge. "judge" has been defined in clause (29) (as amended by act 8 of 1968) of section 2 to mean in the city of ahmedabad the chief judge of the court of small causes. clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 406 states that no appeal shall be heard against a tax, or in the case of an appeal made against a rateable value after a bill for any property tax assessed upon such value has been presented to the appellant, unless the amount claimed from the appellant has been deposited by him with the commissioner. section 411 (as amended by act 8 of 1968) makes provision for appeal to the high court from a decision of the judge in an appeal in certain contingencies. clause (54) of section 2 defines "rateable value" to mean the value of any building or land fixed in accordance with the provisions of the act and the rules for the purpose of assessment to property taxes. according to section 453, the rules in the schedule as amended from time to time shall be deemed to be part of the act. chapter viii of the schedule contains the
. according to clause (1) of rule 7, in order to fix the rateable value of any building or land assessable to a property-tax there shall be deducted from the amount of the annual rent for which such land or building might reasonably be expected to let from year to year a sum equal to ten per cent of the said annual rent, and the said deduction shall be in lieu of all allowance for repairs or on any other account whatever. clauses (2) and (3) of that rule need not be set out as they were struck down by this court in the case of new manek chowk mills (supra). rule 9 relates to the keeping of assessment book in which shall be entered inter alia every year the rateable value of buildings and lands in the city of ahmedabad determined in accordance with the provisions of the act and the rules as also the names of persons primarily liable for the payment of property taxes, if any, leviable on each such building on land. clause (1) of rule 42 reads as under :(1) if the person on whom a notice of demand has been served under rule 41 does not within fifteen days from such service pay the sum demanded or shows sufficient cause for non-payment of the same to the satisfaction of the commissioner and if no appeal is preferred against the said tax, as hereinafter provided, such sum, with all costs of the recovery, may be levied under a warrant in form h or to the like effect, to be issued by the commissioner, by distress and sale of the movable property of the defaulter or the attachment and sale of the immovable property of the defaulter or, if the defaulter be the occupier of any premises in respect of which a property-tax is due, by distress and sale of any movable property found on the said premises or, if the tax be due in respect of any vehicle, boat or animal in whomsoever&amp;'s ownership, possession or control, the same may be.
10. we may now set out the material changes brought about in the corporations act by gujarat act no. 5 of 1970. sections 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, and 13(2) of the amending act read as under :
2. in the
(hereinafter referred to as &amp;'the principal act&amp;'), in section 2, -
(1) before clause (1) the following clause shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, inserted, namely :-
(2) for clause (54), the following shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely :-
4. in section 49 of the principal act, in sub-section (1), -
(1) for the words &amp;'such of the duties of the commissioner&amp;' the words &amp;'such of the duties of the commissioner, including powers and duties of a judicial or quasi-judicial nature, &amp;' shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted;
(2) after the first proviso, the following further proviso shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, added, namely :-
&amp;'provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to empower the commissioner to issue any order regulating the exercise of powers of performance of duties of a judicial or quasi-judicial nature deputed by him.&amp;'
6. in section 129 of the principal act, to clause (b), the following proviso shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, added, namely :-
&amp;'provided that when determining under section 99 or section 150 the rate at which conservancy tax shall be levied for any official year or part of an official year, the corporation may determine different rates for different classes of properties.&amp;'
7. in section 137 of the principal act, to sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be added, namely :-
&amp;'provided that if the corporation shall have determined for any official year any different rate of conservancy tax for any class of properties to which any of the properties referred to in this sub-section belongs, the commissioner shall not, without the previous approval of the corporation fix, for such official year or part thereof, the conservancy tax to be paid in respect of any property belonging to such class for which such different rate may have been determined by the corporation, at any other different rate under this sub-section.&amp;'
10. in section 406 of the principal act, in sub-section (2), -
(1) for the words &amp;'shall be heard&amp;' the words "shall be entertained" shall be substituted; and
(2) the following proviso shall be added after clause (e), namely :-
&amp;'provided that where in any particular case the judge is of opinion that the deposit of the amount by the appellant will cause undue hardship to him, the judge may in his discretion dispense with such deposit or part thereof, either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as he may deem fit.&amp;'
11. in section 411 of the principal act, after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :-
12. in schedule a to the principal act, in chapter viii, -
(i) in sub-rule (3) of rule 7, for the words &amp;'annual rent for which such building, land or premises might reasonably be expected to let from year to year a sum equal to ten per cent of the said annual rent&amp;' the word &amp;'annual letting value of such building, land or premises a sum equal to ten per cent of such annual letting value&amp;' shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been substituted; and
(ii) in sub-rule (1) of rule 42, for the words &amp;'is preferred&amp;' the words &amp;'is preferred or entertained&amp;' shall be substituted.
13. notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court of tribunal or any other authority, -
(1) .. .. ..
(2) no determination of any special or different rate of conservancy tax by a municipal corporation constituted by or under the principal act in respect of any hotel, club, stable, industrial premises or other large premises in exercise of its power under any of the provisions of the principal act, at any time before the commencement of the said ordinance, shall be deemed to have been invalidly made be reason of the corporation having no power to determine such rate at the time when such determination was made; and any such determination shall be deemed to be valid and shall be deemed always to have been validly made under the provisions of the principal act as amended by this act as amended by this act as amended by this act as if this act had been in force at the time when such determination was made; and no such determination of different or special rate of conservancy tax, or any levy of such tax or bill or notice of demand or distress or attachment issued of executed for collection of such tax, shall be be called in question in any court or before any tribunal or authority merely on ground that corporation had no power or authority to determine such different or special rate of conservancy tax in respect of any hotel, club, stable, industrial premises or other large premises or on any ground consequential thereto.
11. the high court protracted hearing which we are given to understand lasted for 21 days besides 4 days for judgment while partly allowing petitions filed before it under article 226 of the constitution made the following declaration :
(v) section 13(2) of gujarat act 5 of 1970 is not violative of article 14 or article 19(1)(f) and cannot be challenged as constitutionally invalid.
(vii) the resolutions passed by the corporation for the official years 1967-68, 1968-69, 1969-70 and 1970-71 to the extent to which they the rate of conservancy tax at 9 per cent inter alia in respect of textile mills and factories belonging to the petitions are ultra vires the proviso to section 129(b) and rate of conservancy tax applicable in respect of these textile mills and factories must, therefore, be taken to be the general rate of 3 per cent.
12. civil appeals nos 489 to 513 and 752 to 755 of 1973 have been filed in this court by the petitioners before the high court against the judgment of that court in so far as the court has upheld the constitutional validity impugned provisions. civil appeals nos 643 to 684 of 1973 have been filed by the municipal corporation of the city of ahmedabad and others against the above judgment in so far as the high court has struck down the impugned provisions and the resolutions. civil appeals nos. 389 to 430 of 1974 has been filed by the state of gujarat against the judgment in so far as the judgment in so far as the high court has struck down the impugned provisions. writ peterson nos. 51, 60 to 73, 87 to 91, 157, 492 to 503, 533, 534 and 583 of 1972 as also writ petition nos. 1866 to 1877 and 2046 of 1973 which have been filed by the aryodaya spg. &amp; wvg. mills co. ltd. and other parties involve substantially the same questions which arises in appeals, though some these writ petitions relate to the subsequent period of 1971-72. writ petition no. 74 of 1972 filed by the ahmedabad electricity co. ltd. involves an additional point regarding its liability to pay property tax which has been levied on the ground that it occupies land below the surface for under-ground cables. this judgment would dispose of all the appeals and writ petitions.
