the judgment was delivered by y. v. chandrachud, j. :
y. v. chandrachud, j. :
2. the kuthbullapur gram panchayat was established in 1959. in 1964 the andhra pradesh state legislature passed the
, 2 of 1964, which with the exception of chapter vii of the act, came into force on 18th january, 1964. the act applies to the kuthbullapur gram panchayat within whose geographical limits the respondent has established a factory began in 1964 and was completed in december, 1965. the factory was constructed without the permission of the gram panchyat. considering the skleton staff which mans the panchayat and its skeleton activities, the respondent's plea that it did not obtain the panchayat's permission because it was not aware of its existence is not implausible. but such awareness has no relevance on the respondent's liability to pay taxes and fees. in any even, on coming to know of the construction of the factory and the other buildings the panchayat asked the respondent to obtain the requisite permission. the respondent asked for ex-port-facto permission in january, 1967.
3. in its meeting of 8th may, 1967, the panchayat passed a resolution for collecting permission fee from the respondent at 1/2 per cent on the capital value of the factory buildings and at 1 per cent on the capital value of other buildings. by a letter dt. 20th august, 1968 the panchayat called upon the respondent to pay house-tax for the years 1966-67, 1967-68 and 1968-69 amounting to rs. 1, 83, 750 at the rat of rs. 61, 250 per annum. on 3rd march, 1969 the panchayat demanded from the respondent a sum of rs. 1, 65, 000 by way of permission fee, rs. 80, 000 being for factory buildings and rs. 85, 000 in respect of the other buildings.
4. on 25th november, 1969 the respondent filed a writ petition in the high court of andhra pradesh challenging the levy of house-tax and the permission fee, by its judgment dt. 6th august, 1971 the high court allowed the writ petition. it held that the buildings constructed by the respondent did not fall within the definition of a 'house' as contained in the act and therefore no house-tax could be levied on the building. regarding the permission fee, the high court repelled the appellant's contention that the fee was in the nature of tax and held that since no services were rendered by the panchayat to the respondent the levy of permission fee was illegal. the high court has granted to the appellant's certificate of fitness under art. 133(1)(a) of the
to appal to this court.
5. sec. 69(1)(a) of the act provides that a gram panchayat shall levy in the village a house-tax. by s. 2(15), as it stood when high court delivered its judgment, 'house' meant a building or hut fit for human occupation whether as a residence or otherwise, "having a separate principal entrance from the common way," and included
. the high court held that buildings other than factory premises were not a 'house' within the meaning of the act because their separate principal entrances were situated on the roads belonging to the respondent and not on the common way as required by s. 2(15). as regards the factory buildings, the high court held that the legislature had included shops, workshops and warehouse but not factories within the definition of a 'house' and therefore factory buildings were also not a 'house' within the meaning of the act. the demand of house-tax was accordingly held illegal.
6. by the
, 16 of 1974, the state legislature has amended the definition of 'house' with retrospective effect so as to eliminate the impediments on which the high court rested its judgment. if the amendment is lawful and valid, it will be unnecessary to consider whether the high court was right in reading the way it did the definition of 'house' as contained in the unamended s. 2(15).
(15) 'house' means a building or hut fit for human occupation, whether as a residence or otherwise, and includes any shop, factory, workshop or warehouse or any building, used for garaging or parking buses or as a bus-stand, cattle shed (other than a cattle shed in an agricultural land), poultry shed or dairy shed;"
(a) anything done or any action taken, including any tax levied and collected, in the exercise of any power conferred by or under the principal act shall be deemed, to be and to have always been, done or taken or levied and collected in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under the principal act as amended by s. 2 of this act, as if the principal act as amended by this act were in force on the date on which such thing was done or action was taken, or tax was levied and collected; and all arrears of tax and other amounts due under the principal act as amended by this act at the commencement of this act, may be recovered as if they had accrued under the principal act as amended by this act;
. the power to validate a law retrospectively is, subject to the limitations aforesaid, an ancillary power to legislate on the particular subject.
9. the state legislature, it is significant, has not overruled or set aside the judgment of the high court. it has amended the definition of 'house' by the substitution of a new s. 2(15) for the old section and it has provided that the new definition shall have retrospective effect, notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment decree or order of any court or other authority. in 'other' words, it has removed the basis of the decision rendered by the high court so that the decision could not have been given in the altered circumstances. if the old s. 2(15) were to define 'house' in the manner that the amended s. 2(15) does, there is no doubt that the decision of the high court would have been otherwise. in fact, it was not disputed before us that the buildings constructed by the respondent meet fully the requirements of s. 2(15) as amended by the act of 1974.
in order to rectify the defect pointed out by this court in the imposition of a cess. but the act did not set out the nature of the amendment nor did it provide that the notifications issued without the sanction of the state government would be deemed to have been issued validly. it was held by this court that this was tantamount to saying that the judgment of a court rendered in the exercise of its legitimate jurisdiction was to be deemed to be ineffective. the position in state of tamil nadu vs. m. rayappa gounder,
12. in the instant case, the amending act of 1974 cures the old definition contained in s. 2(15) of the vice from which it suffered. the amendment has been given retrospective effect and as stated earlier the legislature has the power to make the laws passed by it retro-active. as the amending act does not ask the instrumentalities of the state to disobey or disregard the decision given by the high court but removes the basis of its decision, the challenge made by the respondent to the amending act must fail. the levy of the house-tax must therefore be upheld.
13. under art. 246(3) r/w entry 49 in list ii, seventh schedule of the
14. the clarification became necessary in view of the respondent's contention that the state legislature has no power under entry 49, list ii, to levy tax on the lands and buildings owned or occupied by a factory. entry 36 in list iii relates to "factories" and entry 47 in that list relates to
16. we cannot entertain the respondent's argument that without a proper budget, the gram panchayat cannot impose a tax. such an argument was not made in the high court and it involves an investigation into the fact whether the gram panchayat had or had not prepared a budget. nor can we entertain the respondent's submission that s. 4(b) and (c) of the act of 1974 are invalid. under cl. (b), no suit or other proceeding is maintainable or can be continued in any court or before any authority for the refund of any tax. under cl. (c), no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any such tax. no suit has been filed by the respondent for the refund of tax and no decree or order has been passed by any court or any authority or the refund of any tax. this court does not answer academic questions.
. in the absence of any provision in the parent statute requiring the permission of the gram panchayat for the construction of non-factory buildings, the rule-making power of the government cannot be exercised so as to impose the requirement of a permission, in respect of such buildings.
19. but there is a broader ground on which the levy of permission fee must be struck down. fees are a sort of return or consideration for services rendered, which makes it necessary that there should be an element of quid pro quo in the imposition of a fee. there has to be a co-relationship between the fee levied by an authority and the services rendered by it to the person who is required to pay the fee. there is, in this case, not a word showing such a co-relationship. in the counter-affidavit which the appellants filed in the high court in reply to the respondent's writ petition, nothing at all was stated as to the expenses incurred or likely to be incurred by the gram panchayat in rendering any actual or intended service to the respondent. there may be something in the grievance of the gram panchayat that the mighty respondent and others following the respondent's lead have been persistently refusing to pay taxes which has made it impossible for the gram panchayat to render any services. but the true legal position as stated by mukherjea j. in the commissioner, hindu religious endowments, madras vs. sri lakshmendra thirtha swamiar of sri shirur mutt
20. one cannot take into account the sum-total of the activities of a public body like a gram panchayat to seek justification for the fees imposed by it. the expenses incurred by a gram panchayat or a municipality in discharging its obligatory functions are usually met by the imposition of a variety of taxes. for justifying the imposition of fees the public authority has to show what services are rendered or intended to be rendered individually to the particular person on whom the fee is imposed. the gram panchayat here has not even prepared an estimate of what the intended services would cost it.
