the judgments of the court were delivered by
untwalia, j. (for himself, beg, c.j., chandrachud and kailasam, jj.) -
this batch of 374 appeals by certificate is from the decision of the high court of karnataka given in 374 writ petitions filed by different persons having various kinds of interest in the contract carriages which were taken over by the state of karnataka first by the karnataka contract carriages (acquisition) ordinance, 1976 (karnataka ordinance no. 7 of 1976) (for brevity, hereinafter, the ordinance) followed by the
(karnataka act no. 21 of 1976) (hereinafter to be referred to as the act). the judgment of the high court is reported in k. jayaraj ballal v. state of karnataka
facts
2. the broad and the common facts of the various cases are in a narrow compass and not in dispute. at the outset, we shall state them mostly from the high court judgment. we were not concerned to go into the special facts of some cases in these appeals. they may have to be looked into, if necessary, by the high court in the light of this judgment. the karnataka state road transport corporation (hereinafter called the corporation) was established by the state government of karnataka on august 1, 1961 under section 3 of the
(central act 4 of 1939). objections were invited. some of the writ petitioners preferred their objections. it appears the state government and the corporation dropped the idea of proceeding with the scheme and without concluding the hearing and the disposal of the objections and the finalization of their scheme the government came out with the ordinance which was promulgated on january 30, 1976. as per clause 1(3) of the ordinance, it applied to "all contract carriage(s) operating in the state of karnataka". by a number of notifications issued under the ordinance almost all the contract carriages and the permits specified in the notifications vested in the state. they were transferred to the corporation under clause 20(1) of the ordinance. the officers of the corporation seized the vehicles and the relative permits pursuant to the notifications aforesaid except six vehicles which were operating under inter-state permits belonging to some of the writ petitioners. the seizure of the side six vehicles was stayed by the order of the high court made on april 5, 1976 in some of the earlier writ petitions. the earlier writ petitions were decided on february 26, 1976 and march 3, 1976 by a learned single judge of the high court who held that ordinance did not empower the acquisition of the vehicles not covered by valid contract permits and consequently quashed some of the notifications. the ordinance with some changes was replaced by the act which received the assent of the president on march 11, 1976 and was published in the karnataka gazette dated the march 12, 1976. the operation of the act was, however, made retrospective from january 30, 1976 - the day when the ordinance had been promulgated and come into force. the ordinance was repealed by section 31 of the act and the saving clause in sub-section (2) saysnotwithstanding such repeal -
(i) anything done or any action taken under the said ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this act;
fresh notifications were also issued under the act. the combined effect of all these actions was that whatever was done on and from the january 30, 1976 either under the ordinance or under the act was all deemed to have been done or done under the act. fresh writ petitions numbering 374 were filed in the high court by the various contract carriages operators, financiers and others including those who had filed or succeeded in the earlier writ petitions
3. the high court has allowed all the writ petitions, struck down the act as unconstitutional and has declared it null and void. the notifications have been quashed. the respondents in the writ petitions, namely the appellants before us, were directed to restore the vehicles with the relative permits and all other assets to the operators from whom they were taken over. some consequential directives for determination of damages in some later proceedings were also given
