the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice r. m. lodha
(for short, ' the
') and if yes, whether for his eviction from the land or building in a declared slum area, the written permission of the competent authority under section 22(1)(a) of the
is mandatorily required.
2. the aforesaid question arises in this way. the first respondent-sitabai balu dhotre filed a suit for declaration, possession and permanent injunction in respect of a room admeasuring 8 x 10 ft. situate in survey no. 1001, wadarwadi bearing hut no. 12/161/b/p/424, taluka haveli, pune (for short, 'subject room') against the appellant--laxmi ram pawar and the second respondent--the executive engineer, shivajinagar, sub division, maharashtra state electricity board, pune in the court of 10th joint civil judge, junior division, pune. the case set up by the first respondent was that the subject room was constructed by her in 1987; she got electricity connection in her name and has been paying taxes to the pune municipal corporation. she claimed that she was having photopass in her name. according to her, she permitted the appellant being her friend to stay temporarily for two months in the subject room as she (appellant) was not having any shelter to live in. after expiry of two months, the first respondent asked the appellant to vacate the subject room but she requested the first respondent to allow her to stay in that room for some more time as she was arranging for some alternative accommodation but later on, the appellant denied the first respondent's right in the subject room necessitating the legal proceedings against her. the first respondent averred that the appellant was neither tenant nor licensee but a trespasser and has no right to remain in possession of the subject room.
3. the appellant traversed the first respondent's claim and set up the case in the written statement that the subject room was constructed by her in 1987 and she was holding a photopass for the said room. she denied that she was a trespasser. she set up a plea that subject room was situate in the slum area declared under the
and the suit filed by the first respondent was not maintainable without written permission of the competent authority in view of the prohibition contained in section 22(1)(a) of that act.
4. on the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the trial court framed the following issues :
5. after recording the evidence and hearing the parties, the trial court recorded its findings in the negative in respect of issue nos. 1,3,5 and 6 and in the affirmative with regard to issue no. 2. while dealing with issue no. 4, the trial court held that the suit without obtaining the written permission from the competent authority was not tenable. accordingly, the trial court dismissed the suit on august 31, 2000.
6. the first respondent challenged the judgment and decree passed by the trial court in appeal before the district court, pune which was transferred to the court of the 8th additional district judge, pune for hearing and final disposal. the first appellate court reversed the findings of the trial court on issue nos. 1 and 4 and held that the suit filed by the first respondent was maintainable without the permission of the competent authority as she was a trespasser and in case of trespasser in occupation of slum area governed by the
, the permission of the competent authority was not necessary. the first appellate court, thus, set aside the judgment and decree of the trial court and decreed the suit filed by the first respondent on july 30, 2004 and directed the appellant to deliver the possession of the subject room to the first respondent within 60 days therefrom.
7. being not satisfied with the judgment and decree dated july 30, 2004 passed by the first appellate court, the appellant preferred second appeal before the high court of judicature at bombay but without any success as the second appeal was dismissed in limine on september 20, 2004.
8. the answer to the question which has been framed by us at the outset has to be found in light of the statutory provisions contained in the
. section 2(e) of the
. section 4 provides for declaration of slum area/s by the competent authority on its satisfaction to the aspects stated therein. chapter vi of the
in the same volume, page 634, under the title 'trespass ab initio', the legal position is stated thus :
14. in salmond on the law of torts, 17th edition by r.f.v. heuston, 1977, page 41, the expression, 'trespass by remaining on land' is explained in the following manner :
15.
16.
17.
18. in view of the above, the appeal is allowed; the judgment of the high court dated september 20, 2004 affirming the judgment of the 8th additional district judge dated july 30, 2004 is set aside. the suit filed by the first respondent stands dismissed. however, this will not preclude the first respondent in instituting fresh suit or proceeding for eviction against the appellant after obtaining necessary written permission from the competent authority. the parties shall bear their own costs.
