the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice g. s. singhvi
1. these appeals are directed against order dated 6.10.2004 passed by the division bench of delhi high court whereby it dismissed fao(os) no.212 of 2003 preferred by skyline education institute (india) private limited (hereinafter referred to as ‘the appellant') against the order of the learned single judge who refused to restrain satilila charitable society and s.l. vaswani (hereinafter referred to as ‘the respondents') from using the name ‘skyline' as a part of their trading name in relation to their activities in the field of education and/or as a trademark in relation to any printed matter, including the course material, literature, syllabus etc. and partly allowed fao(os) no.213 of 2003 preferred by the respondents insofar as the learned single judge directed them not to start any new course similar to the course run by the appellant, namely, graduate and post-graduate courses in management, travel and tourism and further directed them to insert a note in the advertisement etc. that their institute is in no way related to the appellant.
2. the appellant is incorporated under the
3. respondent no.1, satilila charitable society is registered under the
. it is said to be part of skyline group of companies/concerns, the details of which are given below:
i) m/s. s.k. contracts (p) ltd. (a company started in 1986)
ii) m/s. skyline construction co. (a partnership firm started in 1990)
iii) m/s. skyline constructions (a partnership firm started in 1993)
iv) m/s. skyline construction engineers & builders co. (a partnership firm started in 1999)
v) m/s. skyline contractors (p) ltd. (a company started in 1999)
vi) m/s. skyline software (p) ltd. (a company for imparting education in software started in 2001)
4. the main object of respondent no.1 is to establish colleges for higher technical education for various sections of the community. in november, 2001, respondent no.1 acquired 13 acres of land in the institutional complex, greater noida, u.p. at a cost of rs.5.25 crores for establishing a multi disciplinary college. thereafter, the respondents obtained permission from all india council for technical education (aicte) and established an institution with the name skyline institute of engineering and technology. they also recruited teaching faculty, made admissions in 4 disciplines and started five-year engineering course with effect from 9.9.2002.
5. as soon as respondent no.1 issued an advertisement for recruiting teachers, the appellant got served notice dated 31.1.2002 upon the respondents and called upon them to stop using the word ‘skyline' in the name of their institute by alleging that the same was affecting its goodwill. some dialogue appears to have taken place between the functionaries of the appellant and respondent no.1 but without any tangible result. therefore, the appellant filed suit no.1553 of 2002 in delhi high court for grant of permanent injunction restraining the respondents herein, their officers, servants, agents, representatives, franchisees or any of them from using the name ‘skyline' as part of their trading name in relation to the activities in the field of education and/or as a trademark in relation to any printed matter, literature, syllabus, etc. or in any other manner whatsoever. the appellant further prayed for award of damages to the tune of rs.5,01,600/- and for issue of a direction to the respondents to give details of the profits earned by them by the alleged wrongful use of the name ‘skyline' and deliver all printed material including syllabi, course materials, stationery, blocks, dies, etc. bearing the name ‘skyline'.
6. in the plaint, the appellant averred that it was established in 1996 on the lines of the previously existing and highly successful skyline college, sharjaha, which was brain child of mr. kamal puri, an eminent educationist, who set up first skyline institute in 1990 with the object of providing high quality graduate and post-graduate level professional education and training to the students. the appellant further averred that skyline business school was established in 1997 as its division with the object of imparting high quality education in the field of management at under-graduate and post-graduate levels and in a period of one decade it has acquired a substantial reputation and good will on account of highly qualified and dedicated faculty, the internationally competitive courses and scientific methodology of imparting education. the appellant claimed that it has affiliation with the university of oxford, university of lincolnshire and humberside, u.k., national american university, usa and other bodies like international air transport association, travel agents association of india, confederation of indian industry, universal federation of travel agents association, etc. and that these bodies have collaborated with the skyline business school for their requirement of trained personnel in the travel business. the appellant then averred that its four months diploma course and the skyline business school's three years' bachelor degree course in business administration have been advertised ever since their inception and the applications submitted by it in 1997 and 1998 for registration of trademarks, skyline institute, skyline medalist, skyline business school and skyline lead faculty in class 16 inter alia for printed matter, literature, stationery, etc. are pending before the competent authority. the appellant referred to an advertisement issued by skyline institute of engineering and technology and pleaded that adoption of the name ‘skyline' by the respondents has caused deception and confusion in the mind of the public necessitating filing of the suit for permanent injunction. the appellant also filed an application under order 39 rules 1 and 2 read with section 151 of
(
7. in the written statement filed by them, the respondents pleaded that the appellant is running its institute illegally without obtaining permission from statutory bodies like aicte, ugc, etc. and that it does not have affiliation with any university. according to the respondents, there is no connection between skyline college based in uae and the appellant's skyline business school and that the courses conducted by skyline business school are not approved by any competent body. the respondents gave the details of their activities and averred that skyline institute of engineering and technology was established to provide high quality education to the students in the field of technical education. the respondents asserted that the appellant cannot claim monopoly over the word ‘skyline' which is a general word and is being used by as many as 32 companies operating in delhi, 117 companies operating all over the country and worldwide there are thousands of institutes/institutions, companies, firms, etc. which are using that word as part of their name. the respondents further pleaded that they were already running several companies/firms with the name skyline and there is no possibility of deception and confusion among the students due to establishment of skyline institute of engineering and technology. another plea taken by the respondents is that as per existing law no trademark can be granted in respect of educational services and, as such, the appellant does not have the locus standi to seek an order of injunction against them more so because skyline institute of engineering and technology was established in 2002 by spending more than rs.20 crores and the students have already taken admission against 240 seats sanctioned by aicte. the respondents also alleged that the appellant was operating from the premises of laxman public school, hauz khas pursuant to an agreement entered into by shri kamal puri in the name of skyline express. the respondents also filed reply on similar lines to the application for temporary injunction.
findings of the learned single judge
is inconsequential. the learned single judge then took cognizance of the fact that while the appellant is neither approved by aicte nor affiliated with any university, the respondents have already obtained the recognition/permission and affiliation from the concerned statutory bodies and have spent huge amount for establishing the institute and further that the first batch of the students is already undergoing five-years course and held that the appellant is not entitled to equitable and discretionary relief by way of temporary injunction. while rejecting the argument that use of the word ‘skyline' by the respondents for the institute of engineering and technology established by them will create confusion in the mind of the general public and the prospective students who want to pursue their studies in the field of engineering and technology, the learned single judge observed:
9. notwithstanding the above conclusion, the learned single judge partly allowed the application filed by the appellant. the operative portion of order dated 6.5.2003 passed by the learned single judge reads thus:-
"in the result, the application is partly allowed and till the disposal of the suit, the defendants are hereby restrained from starting any new courses similar to the courses run by the plaintiff viz. graduate and post- graduate education in management, travel and tourism. the ex-parte ad-interim order dated 01.10.2002 is modified to the extent that the defendants will be free to make publicity/issue advertisements etc. in their existing name for any courses in technical/engineering education provided the said advertisements contain a note to the effect that the institute of the defendants is not related to the plaintiff's institute being run under the name of "skyline educational institute (india) pvt. ltd.", in any way."
10. the appellant and respondents challenged the order of the learned single judge by filing separate appeals. the division bench expressed its agreement with the learned single judge that the word ‘skyline' is not a generic word but was an adoptive word and observed:
the division bench then observed that after having found that the appellant has failed to make out a prima facie case and that balance of convenience was not in its favour, the learned single judge was not justified in directing the respondents not to go ahead with the courses of bba management and mba management. this is evinced from the following extracts of the order of the division bench:
"normally once all the ingredients like prima facie case, balance of convenience, equity if not found in favour of grant of injunction, injunction in any form ought not to have been granted. at the same time, that does not mean that court in order to do justice cannot mould the relief or can grant an injunction in terms not prayed for to do justice between the parties. the concept of grant of injunction also have to be seen in the light as to what would be the loss suffered on account of an injury by non-grant of such an injunction. the argument, which has been raised before us that it was basically respondents suit for grant of an injunction against the appellant from using the word skyline. having come to the conclusion that skyline was a word which was used by a very large number of people in india and abroad and it was a generic word, we cannot appreciate as to how the learned single judge has granted an injunction against the appellant not to start courses in management. to say the least, the present litigation is to have more commerce in education and less education in commerce. private commercial houses by advertising fancy name of foreign universities lure students in this country. all this exercise is not in realm of imparting education but knowing fully well that in india the name of a foreign university is lucrative enough to get larger chunk of money from the pockets of the parents. what is the value of these degrees, whether they are permitted to do so or not, we will advert later. here is a classic case of the respondent who got letters from the university of lincolnshire and humberside, uk both dated 17th october, 1996 which too was for a period of five years only with effect from 1st may, 1997. it as a certificate which the respondent was to given in travel and tourism. however, respondent started giving advertisements for education in bba (hons.) with specialization in marketing or tourism. one such advertisement is at page 516 of the paper book. it was contended before us by mr. singh that on 11 th march, 1998 they had also an arrangement of bba marketing programme from the said university. at this stage, we would not like to go to the question whether the respondent could have represented that they could offer courses in bba marketing or not, what is of relevant is even if we accept the argument of learned counsel for the respondent, they are ‘study centre' of a deemed university, manipal academy of higher education, that is also from the year 2003. the authorization to start courses came in the year 2003, although it was contended by the respondent that they have started courses from 2001. was it justifiable on their part? whether they could do so? was there any legal bar? all are these issues which would be taken care of in the trial. both the parties would be at liberty to lead evidence and argue the matter. at this stage, when the learned trial judge has not entertained the plea of the respondent from prima facie case, balance of convenience and irreparable injury to respondent, restraining the appellant not to go ahead with their courses of bba management and mba management after due approval from aicte in comparison to respondent being a ‘study center' only was without any basis."
