the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice v. s. sirpurkar
1. leave granted.
2. this appeal is filed against the judgment passed by national consumer disputes redressal commission (hereinafter called 'the national commission" for short), allowing the first appeal filed by the respondent herein holding that the complaint filed by the respondent herein was tenable relating to its grievance about the deficiency of service, under section 2(1)(d)(ii) of the
(hereinafter called "the act" for short) as amended.
3. the appellant had sent a detailed proposal for developing certain computer software for the respondent at a cost of rs.36 lacs on 11.2.1998. this proposal was accepted by the respondent who sent the letter of intent indicating its intention to entrust the appellant with the development of the said software. on 1.4.1998, the respondent sent a purchase order to the appellant regarding the terms and conditions at which the appellant was to develop the software for the respondent. that software was to take care of (1) financial accounting, (2) production, (3) marketing, (4) purchase, (5) stores/inventory, (6) fixed assets, and (7) pay roll and personnel system. the appellant wrote to the respondent on 3.2.1999 informing that the stores and purchase modules had been installed in the respondent's office on 1.2.1999. the appellant wrote on 4.2.1999 to the respondent that since the respondent's requirements for the marketing module had gone up considerably in comparison with what had been initially agreed between the parties, the appellant would require additional 250 man hours to complete. on 26.2.1999, the appellant informed the respondent that three modules had been successfully installed, they being, (1) stores, (2) purchase, and (3) production. again on 17.3.1999, the appellant confirmed that even the financial accounting module was also successfully installed. further, the appellant wrote to the respondent that in view of the additional requirements of the respondent, it would require 350 man hours more. on 30.3.1999, the appellant informed the respondent that the changes suggested by the respondent had been successfully carried out. the appellant informed the respondent again that due to the addition of 48 new functions to the marketing module, the estimation for the module had gone up by 45 man days, costing an additional rs.60,000. on 7.4.1999 and 13.4.1999, the appellant informed that the stores and purchase module and financial accounting and marketing modules were also installed respectively on those dates and sought for their feedback. thereafter, there was a lot of correspondence between the parties as regards the work of the said software and in respect of the different modules. it seems, at times, the respondent/complainant expressed its satisfaction over the working of the modules. all this happened in the last months of 1999 and in january, 2000. it seems that till february, 2000, the payment of the appellant was not released requiring the appellant to write to the respondent for the same. the respondent thereafter started complaining about the working of some modules. in the month of september, 2000, the respondent placed a fresh purchase order with the appellant for enhancement of the production module, on which the appellant requested the respondent to clear the outstanding dues which were not cleared till then. the appellant again wrote to the respondent for payment in the month of april, 2001.
4. the disputes started taking ugly shape and the respondent started complaining about the working of various modules. on 15.4.2002, the respondent wrote a letter to the appellant identifying the problems with various modules of the software, which letter was replied to by the appellant. there was then lot of correspondence between september, 2002 and march, 2003 as regards the modules supplied. the respondent, however, sent a legal notice to the appellant through its advocate on 4.4.2003, wherein it alleged deficiency in services rendered by the appellant with respect to all seven modules developed by the appellant. there was another legal notice sent by hand and ultimately a complaint against the appellant came to be filed on 26.6.2003 before the state consumer disputes redressal commission (hereinafter called "the state commission" for short). the appellant, by way of its reply to the complaint, raised a preliminary objection that the respondent/complainant was not a 'consumer' within the meaning of
and also sought the decision on this preliminary objection as an issue. a rejoinder was sent to this reply.
5. by its order dated 4.3.2004, the state commission accepted the appellant's preliminary objection and dismissed the complaint. the respondent/complainant, therefore, filed first appeal no. 218 of 2004 before the national commission. by its order dated 17.12.2009, which is impugned here, the national commission reversed the order of the state commission and held that the 'goods' purchased by the respondent from the appellant were being used by the respondent for a commercial purpose, and, therefore, the respondent was not a 'consumer' within the meaning of section 2(1)(d)(i) of
. however, the national commission further held that notwithstanding such findings, the respondent was entitled to maintain a complaint under
with respect to the deficiency in service during one year warranty period with respect to said goods relying on section 2(1)(d)(ii) of
.
6. we have gone through the impugned judgment, wherein there is a clear cut finding that the software in question amounted to sale of goods by the appellant to the respondent for commercial purpose and as such the respondent would be excluded for being considered as a 'consumer' under section 2(1)(d)(i) of
. however, the national commission then proceeded to hold that there was a warranty period of one year in the year 2000 and as such since the complaint was filed on 1.8.2000, i.e. prior to the amendment of section 2(1)(d)(ii) by the amendment act, 2002, a person hiring or availing of any services for a consideration was not excluded even though the services were availed for any commercial purpose. in that view, it proceeded to hold that if there was any deficiency in service during the warranty period, the complaint could be maintained before the consumer forum for the said purpose. for this, the national commission relied on its judgment in meera industries, howrah vs. modern constructions, howrah
