the order of the court was as follows :
leave granted.
these appeals are directed against order dated 19.02.2008 2008 (supp.l) olr 667 passed by the division bench of orissa high court whereby it allowed the writ petitions filed by the contesting respondents and quashed the orders passed by the state pollution control board, orissa (for short 'the board') directing closure of the stone crushers being operated by them.
in exercise of the power conferred upon it under section 4 of the
read with notification dated 10.2.1988 issued by the government of india, ministry of environment and forests, the government of orissa issued order dated 13.5.1998/5.6.1998 and prescribed the following guidelines for operation of the stone crushers in the state :
(i) all stone crusher units are to confirm pollution control measures and emission standard notified by ministry of environment and forest from time to time along with the standards under section 7 of the said act;
(ii) no stone crusher unit shall be allowed within one k.m. from a town or village boundary;
(iii) no stone crusher should be located within half k.m. from the national of state high ways;
(iv) distance between two stone crusher units shall be at least half k.m. stone crusher units which are within the aforesaid prohibited limit shall shift to other areas within six months from the date of publication r. the notification in the gazette.
the aforementioned notification was amended by another notification dated 1.8.2006 and item no. iv of the earlier notification was deleted.
by an order dated 17/18.7.2002 issued under section 19 of the
(for short '
'), the state government declared the entire state as air pollution control area.
the stone crushing units of the respondents were inspected by the officers of the board sometime in february, 2004 and reports were submitted highlighting violation of the siting criteria and guidelines issued by the state government for operating the stone crushers. thereafter, show cause notices were issued to the respondents under sections 31a of
by the ministry of environment & forests, government of india vide notification no.gsr 742(e) dated 30.8.1990 and no. s08(e) dated 31.12.1990 read with notification dated 13.5.1998 of the state forest & environment department. the respondents filed separate replies to contest the show cause notices. according to the respondents, they had taken adequate measures for checking air pollution. they also pointed out that the state government has been holding discussion with the stone crushers owners association to minimize the emission of air pollution. after considering the replies of the respondents, the board passed orders under section 31a of
and directed closure of the stone crushers.
although, the respondents could have challenged the closure orders by filing appeals under section 31 of
, but instead of availing the statutory alternative remedy, they filed writ petitions under article 226 of the
. with a view to avoid the objection that the writ petitions should not be entertained because statutory remedy of appeal is available against the closure orders passed by the board, the respondents also prayed for quashing notification dated 17/18.7.2002 issued by the state government declaring the entire state as air pollution control area.
the division bench of the high court upheld the validity of the notification issued by the state government under section 19 of
but quashed the closure orders passed by the board by recording the following observations :-
however, liberty was given to the board to make fresh survey of the sites and take action in accordance with law.
