the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice dr. mukundakam sharma
.
[hereinafter referred to as "the act"] and the bills of entry were assessed provisionally on the basis of the importer's declaration pending receipt of the test results from the chemical examiner. 'palm stearin', the subject matter of classification in question, was imported through kakinada port during the period from 26.08.2003 to 28.12.2004. whereas the respondent-assessee sought to classify the goods in question under tariff item no. 15 11 90 90 of the
as "non-edible industrial grade crude palm stearin", the appellant classified the goods in question as "rbd palm stearin" falling under tariff item no. 38 23 11 12 of
, chargeable to duty at bcd 25%, cvd 16% and 4% sad. under tariff item no. 15 11 90 90, the assessment was charged at bcd 20% and nil cvd/sad. the assistant commissioner of customs asked the respondent to pay the differential duty, under s.28 of the
.
3. the chemical examiner, visakhapatnam reported that the goods in question were rbd palm stearin with an admixture of palm fatty acid distillate (in short "pfad") and not crude palm stearin as declared by the importer. after due adjudication process, the assistant commissioner of customs finalized the bills of entry by classifying the impugned goods as rbd palm stearin falling under sub- heading no. 3823.11.12 of the
and demanded the differential duty along with applicable interest. aggrieved by these orders, the respondent preferred an appeal before the commissioner (appeals). when the dispute in this regard reached the commissioner (appeals), the claim of the respondent was dismissed and the order of the asst. commissioner upheld. however, on appeal to the cestat, the tribunal allowed the same while relying on its decision in the case of m/s jocil ltd. & ors v. the commissioner of central excise & customs, visakhapatnam - ii.
4. the cestat, in determining the appeal, took note of the fact that the chemical examiner has only ascertained the free fatty acids of the sample, which comes to 23.2%. according to the tribunal, since the balance contents of 76.8% have not been considered, it could not be conclusively said that the same is not composed of triglycerides. the cestat also relied on the ester value and saponification value registered at the load port (load port analysis) during the time of clearance. the said analysis indicated that the balance is nothing but triglycerides. according to the central revenue chemical laboratory (crcl) opinion which was relied upon by cestat, chapter 15.11 covers palm oil and its fractions - this view is also espoused in the hsn explanatory notes. since palm stearin falling under 15.11 is a glyceride of fatty acids, the cestat concluded that the categorization should also have to be made under ch.15.11. as stated hereinabove, reliance was also placed on its own decision in m/s jocil ltd. & ors v. the commissioner of central excise & customs, visakhapatnam - ii reported at [2008 (225) elt 540
