the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice d. k. jain
1. leave granted.
2. these appeals, by special leave, are directed against the judgments delivered by the high court of punjab and haryana, whereby it dismissed the writ petitions of the appellants herein, holding that the labour court was correct in shifting the burden on the workmen- appellants to prove that their termination was unjustified.
4. on 23rd november, 2000, the respondent-management dismissed the appellant without holding an enquiry mainly on the allegations that he had been participating in tool down strike; had been exhorting other workers to slow down the work so that there is fall in production of cars; had indulged in holding demonstrations within the factory premises and raised derogatory and offensive slogans against the management; and was threatening the supervisors etc. the relevant portion of the dismissal order reads thus:
5. the appellant having raised an industrial dispute, the state government referred the same to the labour court, gurgaon under section 10(1)(c) of the
(for short "the act"). the terms of reference for the adjudication were:
6. on 13th may, 2002, the labour court framed the following issues:
it is manifest that in relation to issue no. 1, the labour court had placed the onus of proof on the management.
7. thereafter, the appellants preferred an application before the labour court for framing additional issues and disposal of the reference by treating them as preliminary issues. one of the proposed additional issue was with reference to the violation of standing order no. 21.3, which stipulates that no order of dismissal shall be made except after holding an enquiry against the workman concerned in respect of the alleged misconduct. however, the labour court, vide order dated 12th august, 2003, dismissed the application, observing as under:
(emphasis supplied by us )
the labour court thus, held that in the first instance, it was for the management to prove, by adducing cogent evidence, that the order of dismissal passed against the workman was legal.
8. however, on a motion being made by the management, the labour court, vide a short order dated 31st january, 2006, shifted the onus of proof in relation to the afore-extracted issue no. 1 on the workman. the order reads as follows:
9. being aggrieved by the said order, the appellant preferred a writ petition before the high court. as afore-mentioned, the high court, vide judgment dated 22nd january, 2008 has dismissed the writ petition of the appellant, inter alia, observing that onus of establishing a plea of victimization or that he had completed 240 days of service in the last calendar year, in order to avail of the benefit of sections 25f, 25g and 25h of
, is on the workman. the high court held that the order of the labour court cannot be said to be perverse or illegal warranting its interference.
10. hence, the present appeals.
