the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice t. s. thakur
1. this appeal by special leave arises out of an order passed by the high court of kerala at ernakulam whereby c.r.p. no.558 of 1994 has been dismissed and the orders passed by the rent controller and the rent control appellate authority dismissing the eviction petition filed against the tenant wife affirmed. in a nutshell, the facts giving rise to the controversy are as under:
2. late shri k. sachindanda iyer and his wife late smt. a sheshambal sachindanda iyer owners of the premises in dispute let out the same to respondent no.1 for a period of three years in terms of a lease dated 12th april, 1983. on the expiry of the lease period the owners filed rcp no.116 of 1986 before the rent controller at ernakulam seeking eviction of the tenant-occupant on the ground that they required the same for their bona fide personal occupation within the meaning of section 11(3) of the

. the prayer for eviction was opposed by the tenant, inter alia, on the ground that the owners did not require the demised premises and that the tenant would find it difficult to shift its business to any other premises on account of non-availability of a suitable accommodation for being so. the rent controller eventually came to the conclusion that the owners had failed to establish their bona fide requirement of premises. the rent controller held that the owners had shifted their residence from cochin and were living with their daughter and son-in-law who were running a nursing home in that city.
3. aggrieved by the order passed by the rent controller, the owners appealed to the appellate authority who affirmed the decision taken by the rent controller holding that the owners were residing with their daughter and son-in-law at ernakulam in a building owned by the owners. the appellate authority also found that the owners had a cottage at kodaikanal and that being fairly old had no reason to shift back to ernakulam in search of better medical facilities especially when their own son-in-law was running a nursing home at coimbatore where such facilities were available to them. absence of any medical evidence to show that the owners suffered from any illness was also cited as a ground for dismissal of the prayer for eviction.
4. aggrieved by the orders passed by the rent controller and the appellate authority the owners brought up the matter before the high court of kerala in a revision with a view to have the concurrent findings recorded by the courts below set aside. the high court, as noted earlier, has refused to intervene in the matter and dismissed the revision petition. the high court held that it was not expected to reappraise the evidence produced by the parties in the exercise of its revisional jurisdiction and that the limited question that fell for its consideration was whether the procedure followed by the rent controller and the appellate authority was illegal, irregular or improper. the high court noted that the rent of the premises paid by the tenant had not been revised since the year 1973. the same was, therefore, enhanced to rs.10,000/- p.m. w.e.f. 1.11.2003 onwards with liberty to the parties to approach the competent court for fixation of fair rent for the demised premises. the present appeal, as seen earlier, calls in question the correctness of the above orders.
5. it is not in dispute that during the pendency of the revision petition before the high court the landlord shri k. sachindanda iyer passed away on 24th april, 1996 leaving behind his wife smt. a. sheshambal sachindanda iyer as the sole revision petitioner seeking eviction of the respondent- tenant. consequent upon the dismissal of the revision petition the present appeal was filed by smt. a. sheshambal sachindanda iyer alone who too passed away before this appeal could be heard for final disposal. ia no.7/2008 filed on 14th november, 2008 sought substitution of the legal representatives of the appellant on the basis of a will left behind by the deceased according to which the property in question has to devolve upon the three daughters left behind by the deceased. it is common ground that two of the daughters are living in india one each at coimbatore and bihar the third daughter is settled in america.
