the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice dalveer bhandari
1. this appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 6.11.2003 passed by the high court of delhi in civil writ no.3000 of 2003. brief facts which are necessary to dispose of this appeal are recapitulated as under:
2. the directorate general of security (for short 'dgs') under cabinet secretariat had four units.
these four units had a common and combined dgs (secretarial) service with inter-se seniority and the inter unit transfer liability having 4 cadres:
1) secretarial
2) ministerial
3) accounts
4) stenographers
3. the respondent was directly recruited as assistant in the year 1995 in the special service bureau. in 1996, he requested for his transfer to another unit aviation research centre but he could not be transferred for administrative reasons.
4. it may be pertinent to mention here that the union of india took a policy decision in january, 2001, to transfer the administrative control of the special service bureau and the chief inspectors of armaments from the cabinet secretariat to the ministry of home affairs vide cabinet secretariat order no.1/2/2001-ea-1 dated 15.1.2001 and merged the ministerial staff of the chief inspectorate of armaments with that of special service bureau. as a consequence of transfer of special service bureau and the chief inspectorate of armaments, two units of the cabinet secretariat were transferred to the ministry of home affairs, vide cabinet secretariat order no.i/2/201-ea-1-3483-a, dated 23.08.2001.
5. the office of directorate general of security (secretarial) service was trifurcated into:
(ii) aviation research centre (secretarial) service; and
(iii) special frontier force (secretarial) service.
6. the secretarial/ministerial staff of the directorate general of security (secretarial) service was apportioned on "as is where is" basis with the approval of the directorate general of security (secretarial), home secretary and the cabinet secretary and the incumbents of the appointed posts were made to continue in their respective units on "as is where is" basis at the time of trifurcation on 23.1.2001.
7. the respondent challenged the validity of the cabinet secretariat order dated 23.8.2001 and the special service bureau directorate's order dated 21.12.2001 containing the trifurcation orders of the directorate general of security (secretarial) service before the central administrative tribunal, principal bench, new delhi.
8. the order was assailed on the ground that the said orders did not provide opportunity to the staff of the erstwhile directorate general of security (secretarial) service to exercise option for choosing an organisation of their choice out of the three organisations.
. the respondent prayed that the aforesaid orders dated 23.08.2001 and 21.12.2001 be quashed.
10. the respondent also prayed that the appellant union of india be directed to provide an opportunity to the incumbents of the erstwhile directorate general of security (secretarial) service to opt any of these trifurcated services in a fair and just manner.
11. the central administrative tribunal ("tribunal", for short) by its order dated 13.11.2002 allowed the original application filed by the respondent and held that the order dated 9.9.1993 by which the joint cadre has been done away with is clearly violative of the rights of the respondent under article 16 of the
.
12. the tribunal also observed that once a joint cadre is created under the orders of a competent authority, it can only be dismembered if the fundamental rights of the public servants are not infringed. the tribunal further observed as under:
13. the appellant union of india aggrieved by the order dated 13.11.2002 passed by the tribunal, filed a writ petition before the division bench of the delhi high court. the division bench relied on the circular dated 18.5.1994 issued by the ministry of personnel, public grievances and pension when the two separate cadres in the ministry of communications were created and came to the conclusion that an opportunity to exercise the option had to be granted to the respondent. the writ petition filed by the union of india was dismissed by the high court by the impugned judgment.
14. the appellant aggrieved by the impugned judgments of the tribunal and delhi high court has preferred this appeal on the following questions of law:
(b) whether the high court is right in relying upon the circular issued by the ministry of personnel, public grievances and pension, in may, 1994 at the time of bifurcation of ministry of communication, which provided for an opportunity to the staff concerned to exercise option for choice between the bifurcated cadres?
15. the appellant submitted that the circular of 1994 related to bifurcation of the ministry of communication and in that case the resultant units still remained part and parcel of the parent ministry i.e. ministry of communication even after the bifurcation. while the organisation of the directorate general of security (secretarial) service trifurcated into three different and independent departments under the ministry of home affairs under the cabinet secretariat.
16. it was also submitted that the object of bifurcation in the case of former is the classification of the two cadres on the basis of different functions to be performed by them for better command and control, whereas in the present transfer case, the trifurcation was related as a consequence of transfer of administrative control of the special service bureau to the ministry of home affairs from cabinet secretariat, in the interest of national security i.e. to guard international border all along indo nepal border.
17. special service bureau, aviation research centre, special frontier force and the chief inspectorate of armaments (cioa) were four units of the directorate general of security under the cabinet secretariat. these four units had a common and combined directorate general of security (secretarial) service comprising of four cadres, namely secretarial, ministerial, accounts and stenographers cadres with inter-se seniority and inter unit transfer liability as notified under the recruitment rules vide cabinet secretariat notification no.ea/se-115/70 dated 04.11.1975.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
