the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice t. s. thakur
2. in south malabar gramin bank vs. coordination committee of south malabar gramin bank employees union (2001 (1) scc 101
, and that it should try to maintain parity between the pay structure of the employees of the rrbs and those working in the nationalized commercial banks. as a sequel to the said direction the government of india, ministry of finance, department of economic affairs (banking division) issued notification dated 11th april, 2001, inter alia, determining the pay scales of the employees of rrbs and granting to them the benefit of 6th and 7th bipartite settlements and officers wage revision w.e.f. 1st november, 1992 and 1st november, 1997 respectively. the notification attempted to bring at par the pay scales of the rrb employees and those of their counterparts in other nationalized banks. it was then followed by a letter dated 25th april, 2001, defining the expressions "basic pay and dearness allowance" used in the notification. the clarification was to the effect that "basic pay and the dearness allowance" would mean "basic pay, dearness pay, dearness allowances, ad hoc or additional d.a.; interim relief or any other allowance which form part of pay or d.a."
3. pursuant to the above, the appellant-bank issued a circular dated 16th may, 2001, giving to its employees the benefit of what is known as "computer increment" as per 6th and 7th bipartite settlements and officers wage revision. the circular envisaged that each staff member shall file an undertaking that he/she shall refund in lump the excess amount drawn by them in case a contrary decision is received from the government of india/nabard sponsor bank. this circular was some time later recalled by an order dated 5th june, 2001 and the benefit of computer increment and automatic switch over from scale ii to scale iii granted to the employees of the appellant-bank withdrawn. the order further directed that the amount already paid shall be recovered from the employees concerned.
4. aggrieved by the order aforementioned, the employees- association filed writ petition no.7367 of 2001 challenging the validity of the withdrawal order on several grounds. while the said writ petition was still pending, this court passed an order dated 7th march, 2002 in all india regional rural bank officers federation and ors. vs. govt. of india and ors. 2002 (3) scc 554
. a learned single judge of the high court of judicature at patna, however, allowed the writ petition nos.7367 and 5924 of 2002 by a common order dated 17th december, 2002 and directed the appellant-bank to act upon the decision dated 17th april, 2002, taken by the government of india, ministry of finance, department of economic affairs (banking division) in its letter and spirit and to pay to the employees the benefits admissible to them in accordance with law. the said direction proceeded on the premise that the decision of the government of india dated 17th april, 2002, particularly, clause (5) of the notification issued by the government envisaged grant of all allowances admissible to the employees of the nationalised banks to those serving in the rrbs. a letters patent appeal preferred against the said order, having been dismissed summarily, the appellant-bank has filed appeal to this court by special leave as already noticed above.
