the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice dr. mukundakam sharma
1. this appeal is preferred by m/s parle bisleri pvt. ltd (formerly known as m/s limca flavours and fragrances ltd and appellant herein) and is directed against the order of the customs, excise and service tax appellate tribunal (cestat), mumbai which set aside the order of commissioner of central excise, ahmedabad. the commissioner vide order-in-original no.11/commr/96 dated 16.9.1996, dropped all proceedings initiated against the respondents in the show cause notice f. no. v/22/15-18 da 94 dated 24-2-94. however, on appeal, the cestat partly allowed the claim of the revenue, and aggrieved by the same, the appellant has approached this court.
3. m/s. pel uses the products sold by the appellant to manufacture non-alcoholic beverages base (nabb). in addition to nabb, m/s. pel also manufactures flavours as the appellant does. during the same period mentioned above, m/s pel enjoyed the benefit of notification no. 175/86 and 1/93 for the year 92-93 and 93-94. (oct. 93). the flavours named above are researched and developed by pel, but were allowed to be manufactured by the appellant with the code names given by pel. the flavours are used in the manufacture of beverages like gold spot, limca, rimzim etc.
4. consequent upon the visit to the factory premises and office premises of parle group of companies at ahmedabad and bombay on 20.03.93 by the officers of the directorate general of anti evasion (central excise), new delhi on the basis of the information that m/s pel and their group companies were indulged in evasion of central excise duty, various documents were seized and the statement of key personnel recorded. as we have mentioned earlier, the order-in-original passed by the commissioner of central excise and customs withdrew the demand for differential duty and found no case for imposition of penalty for any of the companies in question.
5. before we move on to the appeal as it unraveled before the cestat, it is pertinent to note here that notification no. 175/86 and 1/93 require that the aggregate value of clearances of all excisable goods from a factory by one or more manufacturer should not exceed rs. 150 lakhs and rs. 200 lakhs respectively in the preceding financial year. the allegations against the appellant before the cestat, then, were that the clearances of the appellant during the period from 1989 to october 1993 must be clubbed with that of m/s pel and m/s pil as they are effectively one and the same company, and thus the appellant is not entitled to the benefit of the aforesaid notifications. it was also an issue of appeal before the cestat that the appellant herein was using the brand name belonging to another person (m/s pel) who was not entitled to the benefit of the said notifications. the third and final issue concerned the allegation of undervaluation of flavours by the appellant, which resulted in an inaccurate assessment and hence the differential duty should be extracted.
6. in response to these issues in appeal, the cestat ruled the revenue's claim of undervaluation in favour of the appellant primarily on the ground that the department did not come out with quantifiable data to indicate the extent to which the price was suppressed by the appellant. however, on the issue of misuse of brand name by the appellant, the tribunal came to the conclusion that m/s. pel did in fact, own the brand name and held that the defence of the appellant that the flavours were marked only by virtue of a code and not identified as a brand did not hold water. to quote the tribunal: -
on this line of reasoning, the tribunal held that the appellant will not be entitled to the benefit of notification no. 175/86 and 1/93 for the products with code names g-44t, l-33a, t-iipc, t-iip, r- 66m and k-55t which belonged to m/s pel. however, the tribunal also observed that this finding was only in respect of the years 89-90, 90-91 91-92 and 93-94 (till oct 93) and not for the year 92-93 because in 92-93, as ruled by the tribunal subsequently in the same judgment, the brand owner (m/s. pel) of these flavours himself was entitled to the benefit of notification no. 175/86.
7. on the primary issue of whether the clearances of the said companies could be clubbed together, and the companies themselves could be treated as one manufacturer, the tribunal found that the effective financial control and management emanated from a common core, and therefore the companies could well be said to be interdependent and even interrelated. however, the tribunal only partly allowed the appeal of the revenue in so far as it held that the appellant herein was indeed entitled to ssi exemption between the period from 88-89 to 92-93 (upto 31.3.93]. such a conclusion was based on the ruling of this court in commissioner of central excise, new delhi v. modi alkalies & chemicals ltd. & ors reported at 2004 (171) e.l.t. 155
