the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice t. s. thakur
1. this appeal by special appeal arises out of a judgment and order dated 25th february, 2003, passed by the high court of madhya pradesh at jabalpur, gwalior bench, whereby second appeal no.230 of 1995 filed by the appellants-plaintiffs was allowed but only in part and to the extent of granting a decree for injunction restraining the defendants-respondents from interfering with the possession of the appellants over the suit property till such time the said property is partitioned between them through the competent revenue court concerned.
the facts necessary for disposal of this appeal may be briefly stated as under:
2. late shri raj kishore the predecessor-in-interest of the plaintiffs-appellants herein owned jointly with his brother defendant-respondent no.2 shri jugal kishore agricultural land situate in different survey numbers of village morasa, tehsil kurwai in the state of madhya pradesh. in terms of a sale-deed executed and registered on 6th july, 1974 by shri raj kishore an extent of 14 bighas and 15 biswas of the land aforementioned from out of survey nos. 436, 439/1 and 441 was transferred to the defendant-respondent no.1 for a sum of rs.6,000/- only. the plaintiff's case is that the transfer was only by way of security for the repayment of rs.6,000/- which according to the plaintiff was taken only as a loan. the plaintiff's further case is that return of the loan amount by the 6th july, 1981 would result in the land in question being transferred back to the plaintiff to which effect an agreement was also executed between the parties to the transaction on the 6th july, 1974 itself. the plaintiff alleged that the possession of the land in question continued with him and defendant no.2 as agreed. it was also agreed between the parties that defendant no.1 shall not get the disputed land mutated in their name till 6th july, 1981, the date by which the plaintiff could repay the amount of loan and secure the return of their land.
3. the plaintiff further alleged that contrary to the agreement between the parties defendant no.1 got a mutation regarding the land in question attested in his favour although he had no right to do so in view of the specific stipulation contained in the agreement between the parties forbidding any such mutation. the plaintiff asserted that they had approached defendant no.1 several times to receive back the sum of rs.6,000/- borrowed from him and to get the land in question transferred back to them, but the said defendant had refused to do the needful. the plaintiff in that backdrop prayed for a decree for declaration to the effect that the sale-deed executed by him in favour of defendant no.1 was void and ineffective and that he continued to be in cultivating possession of the land as owner thereof.
4. defendant-respondent no.1 contested the suit by filing a written statement in which he denied the assertion that the sale-deed in question was executed by way of security for repayment of any loan. it was also alleged that the defendant was in possession of the land in question ever since the execution of the sale-deed and that a mutation based on the sale-deed had been attested in his favour. defendant no.1 further alleged that he had made improvements over the land and that a suit for declaration simplicitor was not maintainable as the plaintiff was out of the possession of the land in question.
5. on the pleadings of the parties the trial court of civil judge first class, kurwai, district vidisha, framed as many as eight issues for determination and recorded evidence adduced by the parties before it. the trial court eventually held that the sale-deed in question was not executed as security for any loan as alleged by the plaintiff nor was the execution of agreement dated 6th july, 1974 proved. the trial court further held that defendant no.1 had not forcibly occupied the land in question during the pendency of the suit as alleged by the plaintiff.
6. aggrieved by the dismissal of the suit the plaintiff appealed to the district judge, vidisha, m.p. during the pendency of the said appeal the plaintiff filed an application for permission to amend the plaint to add an alternative prayer to the effect that in case the sale-deed in favour of defendant no.1 was held to be validly executed, the plaintiff be given a decree for specific performance by execution of a sale-deed for the transfer of the suit property in his favour. this application was allowed by the trial court but in revision the same was set aside and the amendment application directed to be considered along with the main appeal.
7. the first appellate court accordingly heard the appeal and the application for amendment together and by its judgment and order dated 19th july, 1995 dismissed both. the first appellate court held that the prayer for amendment of the plaint to seek a decree for the transfer of the land in question in favour of the plaintiffs-appellant was time barred and that the amendment would in any case alter the nature of the suit.
8. on the merits of the case the first appellate court held that there was no stipulation in the sale-deed that the land transferred thereby shall be retransferred to the vendor by executing a sale-deed in his favour. in so far as agreement (marked ex.d1) for retransfer of the land in question to the plaintiff was concerned, the first appellate court held that while the execution of the agreement was proved there was no mention in the same about the sale-deed in question being by way of security for repayment of the loan. the first appellate court observed:
9. aggrieved by the judgment aforementioned the plaintiffs-appellants filed second appeal no.230 of 1995 before the high court of madhya pradesh, gwalior bench. the high court held that the dismissal of the application for amendment by the first appellate court on the ground that the prayer sought to be incorporated by the amendment was barred by limitation was not correct. all the same the proposed amendment would make no material difference unless the plaintiff also pleaded that he was ready to perform his part of the contract so as to entitle him to any relief based on the agreement executed between the parties. the dismissal of the application was on that ground upheld.
10. on the merits of the case the high court took the view that whenever a sale-deed was accompanied by a document for re-conveyance of the property sold the transaction between the parties would amount to a mortgage, subject to the condition that the mortgagee must get the property re- conveyed within the period stipulated for that purpose. the high court further held that there was no cogent evidence on record to prove that defendant no.1 was in possession of the suit land on the date of the filing of the suit. even in ex.d-2 relied upon by the defendant, the property was recorded jointly in the names of the plaintiff and defendant no.2 in the revenue records for the year 1980-81. the high court on that basis held that the finding of the courts below that the property was not held jointly by the plaintiff and defendant no.2 was perverse. the appeal was accordingly allowed in part and defendant no.1 restrained from interfering with the possession of the plaintiff till such time he obtained a decree for partition from the revenue court concerned. the present appeal assails the above judgment and order of the high court as noticed earlier. raj kishore the plaintiff in the suit having passed away during the pendency of this appeal, his legal representatives were brought on record on 5th november 2008.
