the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice v. s. sirpurkar
1. leave granted.
claimants-appellants are the legal representatives of one joginder singh who was a young man of 34 years. an accident took place on 16.09.2005 while deceased joginder singh was driving a motorcycle bearing registration no.hr-26-p/9413 while going to village nimot from village mandavar. as per the claim, the motorcycle met with an accident as it was hit by a vehicle, tata 207 bearing registration no. hr-38-l/6592 which was being driven in a rash and negligent manner. it is claimed that in that accident joginder singh died on the spot. he was claimed to be a registered medical practioner and that his monthly earning was rs.25,000/- approximately. therefore, a claim was filed under section 166 of the
wherein the driver het lal, owner of the vehicle pramod kumar and the oriental insurance company were joined as party respondents. the claim was opposed by the driver and he took the plea that no such accident ever took place though he admitted that he was the driver of aforementioned vehicle. in his statement, however, the owner i.e. respondent no.2, while opposing the claim, admitted that his vehicle was engaged in the accident in paragraph three of his written statement. the part of paragraph 3 of the written statement of respondent no.2 is as under:
3. the same plea is repeated in the written statement while replying to paragraphs 1 to 13 of the claim petition practically in the same words as stated above. the owner of the vehicle also went on to oppose the petition on the ground that the claimants-appellants were not the only legal heirs of the deceased nor were the sufferers or dependent upon him and that they had filed the petition only to extract huge amount by way of compensation. the claims made by the claimants- appellants in their petition about the age and income of the deceased were also denied.
4. thus, it was clear that at least the owner of the vehicle admitted the claim made in the claim petition to the effect that the vehicle was engaged in an accident with the vehicle of the deceased and that it was being driven by respondent no.1 who was his driver. in support of their claim of the appellants, following issues were framed by the tribunal, they being:-
(1) whether the accident took place due to rash and negligent driving of vehicle no. hr-38- l/6592 by respondent no.1?
(2) whether the petitioners are entitled to compensation on account of death of joginder singh in the accident and, if so, to what amount and from whom?
(3) whether respondent no.1 was not holding a valid and effective driving licence at the time of the accident?
(4) relief.
5. while respondent nos.1 and 2 did not contest the claim and they were proceeded ex parte, it was only the insurance company, the third respondent who took part in the proceedings and tendered some documents to support their claim.
6. one virender singh was examined as pw-11 who was an eye-witness to the accident. he supported the fact of accident which took place near a bridge. he also asserted that the tata 207 vehicle was being driven at a very high speed and in a rash and negligent manner and it hit a motorcyclist from behind. he also gave the correct registration number of the motorcycle. the only suggestion made to him was that he was not present at the time of the accident and he was a procured witness. the appellants also led the evidence that the driver, respondent no.1 was facing trial for causing accident in the court of smt. ranjana agrawal, judicial magistrate 1st class, gurgaon for offences under sections 279 and 304a,
(ipc). the tribunal took the note that the first information report was filed after 18 hours of the accident by the brother of the deceased wherein it was claimed that his elder brother joginder singh who was riding the motorcycle no.hr-26-p/9413 was hit by some unknown vehicle and he died on the spot. the tribunal also noted that this witness had done the further formalities of removing the dead body etc. the tribunal then posed a question to itself as to how and under what circumstances the police came to know that accident was caused by the tata 207 vehicle belonging to respondent no.2 and that at the time of the accident, it was being driven by respondent no.1. the tribunal noted that one dhani ram of village sanpla was present at his house when the first respondent, who was the son of his brother-in- law, came to him and asked him to produce him before the police saying that the accident in question was caused by him. dhani ram, on this, asked him to bring the offending vehicle which he brought. that is how het lal produced himself on 18.9.2005 to the police along with the vehicle. the tribunal questioned this and doubted this story of dhani ram. according to the tribunal, there was no reason for respondent no.1 to go to dhani ram and make the request, as he did. the tribunal also drew an adverse inference on account of non-examination of dhani ram. the tribunal also noted the fact that in the charge-sheet, exhibit p-9, virender singh was initially not cited as a witness. the tribunal, therefore, deduced that the alleged confession by respondent no.1 to dhani ram was a weak type of evidence. virender singh was introduced as eye-witness and his name was added with different ink in the report in last at serial no.11. the tribunal did not accept his evidence on the ground that virender singh did not take any step to go to the police after having seen the accident and his statement was recorded as late as after 20 days. the tribunal also refused to comment on the fact that respondent no.1 was facing a trial for the offence under sections 279 and 304a,
. lastly, the tribunal wrote a finding that it was apparent that it is a case of hit and run by some unknown vehicle and the alleged unknown vehicle was a introduced vehicle to claim compensation.
7. in view of this, the claim was dismissed.
8. the claimants-appellants came to the high court and the high court virtually confirmed the order repeating the findings given by the tribunal including a finding that the offending vehicle owned by respondent no.2 and allegedly driven by respondent no.1 was not involved in the accident at all.
