the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice r. v. raveendran
1. this appeal was referred by a two-judge bench to a larger bench on 30.11.2000, being of the view that the decision of this court in oberai forwarding agency v. new india assurance co. ltd. - 2002 (2) scc 407
2. the first respondent (also referred to as the `assured' or the `consignor') is a manufacturer of the cotton yarn. it took a policy of insurance from the second respondent (national insurance co. ltd, referred to as the `insurer'), covering transit risks between the period 11.5.1995 and 10.5.1996 in respect of cotton yarn sent by it to various consignees through rail or road against theft, pilferage, non-delivery and/or damage. the first respondent entrusted a consignment of hosiery cotton yarn of the value of rs.7,70,948/- to the appellant (also referred to as the `carrier') on 6.10.1995 for transportation and delivery to a consignee at calcutta. the goods vehicle carrying the said consignment met with an accident and the consignment was completely damaged. on the basis of a surveyor's certificate issued after assessment of the damage, the second respondent settled the claim of the first respondent for rs.447,436/- on 9.2.1996. on receiving the payment, the first respondent executed a letter of subrogation-cum-special power of attorney in favour of the second respondent on 15.2.1996. thereafter, respondents 1 and 2 filed a complaint under the
(`act' for short) against the appellant before the district consumer disputes redressal commission, dindigul, claiming compensation of rs.447,436/- with interest at 12% per annum, for deficiency in service, as the damage to the consignment was due to the negligence on the part of the appellant and its servants. it was averred that the insurer as subrogee was the co-complainant in view of the statutory subrogation in its favour on settlement of the claim and the letter of subrogation-cum- special power of attorney executed by the assured.
3. the district forum by its order dated 8.11.1996 allowed the complaint and directed the appellant to pay rs.447,436/- with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of accident (8.10.1995) till date of payment to the insurer, on the basis of the subrogation. the district forum held that the failure to deliver the consignment in sound condition was a deficiency in service, in view of the unrebutted presumption of negligence arising under sections 8 and 9 of the
. the appeal filed by the appellant before the state consumer disputes redressal commission, madras, challenging the said order was dismissed on 2.4.1998. the appellant thereafter filed a revision before the national consumer disputes redressal commission in the year 1999. the national commission dismissed the appellant's revision petition by a short non-speaking order dated 19.7.1999 which reads thus: "we do not find any illegality or jurisdictional error in the order passed by the state commission." the said order is challenged in this appeal by special leave.
4. the appellant herein resisted the complaint on the following grounds:
we extract below the relevant portion of the said judgment:
6. the referring bench which heard this appeal considered the decision in oberai. it was of the view that oberai required reconsideration by a larger bench, for the following reasons (vide order dated 30.11.2000) :
. the respondents, on the other hand, contended that the decision in oberai required reconsideration on several grounds, set out in the reference order.
re : questions (a) to (c) and the correctness of oberai
9. a ‘complaint', in the context of this case, refers to an allegation in writing made by a ‘consumer' that the services availed of or hired (or agreed to be availed of or hired) suffer from `deficiency' in any respect (vide section 2(c) of
). a `consumer' is defined under section 2(d) of
, relevant portion of which is extracted below :
11. a contract of insurance is a contract of indemnity. the loss/damage to the goods covered by a policy of insurance, may be caused either due to an act for which the owner (assured) may not have a remedy against any third party (as for example when the loss is on account of an act of god) or due to a wrongful act of a third party, for which he may have a remedy against such third party (as for example where the loss is on account of negligence of the third party). in both cases, the assured can obtain reimbursement of the loss, from the insurer. in the first case, neither the assured, nor the insurer can make any claim against any third party. but where the damage is on account of negligence of a third party, the assured will have the right to sue the wrongdoer for damages; and where the assured has obtained the value of the goods lost from the insurer in pursuance of the contract of insurance, the law of insurance recognizes as an equitable corollary of the principle of indemnity that the rights and remedies of the assured against the wrong-doer stand transferred to and vested in the insurer. the equitable assignment of the rights and remedies of the assured in favour of the insurer, implied in a contract of indemnity, known as `subrogation', is based on two basic principles of equity : (a) no tort-feasor should escape liability for his wrong; (b) no unjust enrichment for the injured, by recovery of compensation for the same loss, from more than one source. the doctrine of subrogation will thus enable the insurer, to step into the shoes of the assured, and enforce the rights and remedies available to the assured.
12. the term `subrogation' in the context of insurance, has been defined in black's law dictionary thus :
`right of subrogation' is statutorily recognized and described in section 79 of the
section 140 of
the concept of subrogation was explained in the following manner by chancellor boyd in national fire insurance co. vs. mclaren - 1886 (12) or 682
in banque financiere de la cite vs. parc (battersea) ltd. [1999 (1) a.c.221
13. an `assignment' on the other hand, refers to a transfer of a right by an instrument for consideration. when there is an absolute assignment, the assignor is left with no title or interest in the property or right, which is the subject matter of the assignment. the difference between `subrogation' and `assignment' was stated in insurance law by macgillivray & parkington (7th edn.) thus :
the difference between subrogation and assignment was highlighted by the court of appeals thus in james nelson & sons ltd. vs. nelson line (liverpool) ltd. (no.1) - 1906 (2) kb 217
the difference between assignment and subrogation was also explained by the madras high court in vasudeva mudaliar vs. caledonian insurance co. - [air 1965 mad. 159
14. subrogation, as an equitable assignment, is inherent, incidental and collateral to a contract of indemnity, which occurs automatically, when the insurer settles the claim under the policy, by reimbursing the entire loss suffered by the assured. it need not be evidenced by any writing. but where the insurer does not settle the claim of the assured fully, by reimbursing the entire loss, there will be no equitable assignment of the claim enabling the insurer to stand in the shoes of the assured, but only a right to recover from the assured, any amount remaining out of the compensation recovered by the assured from the wrongdoer, after the assured fully recovers his loss. to avoid any dispute with the assured as to the right of subrogation and extent of its rights, the insurers usually reduce the terms of subrogation into writing in the form of a letter of subrogation which enables and authorizes the insurer to recover the amount settled and paid by the insurer, from the third party wrong-doer as a subrogee-cum- attorney. when the insurer obtains an instrument from the assured on settlement of the claim, whether it will be a deed of subrogation, or subrogation-cum-assignment, would depend upon the intention of parties as evidenced by the wording of the document. the title or caption of the document, by itself, may not be conclusive. it is possible that the document may be styled as `subrogation' but may contain in addition an assignment in regard to the balance of the claim, in which event it will be a deed of subrogation-cum-assignment. it may be a pure and simple subrogation but may inadvertently or by way of excessive caution use words more appropriate to an assignment. if the terms clearly show that the intention was to have only a subrogation, use of the words "assign, transfer and abandon in favour of" would in the context be construed as referring to subrogation and nothing more.
15. we may, therefore, classify subrogation under three broad categories: (i) subrogation by equitable assignment; (ii) subrogation by contract; and (iii) subrogation-cum- assignment.
15.1) in the first category, the subrogation is not evidenced by any document, but is based on the insurance policy and the receipt issued by the assured acknowledging the full settlement of the claim relating to the loss. where the insurer has reimbursed the entire loss incurred by the assured, it can sue in the name of the assured for the amount paid by it to the assured. but where the insurer has reimbursed only a part of the loss, in settling the insurance claim, the insurer has to wait for the assured to sue and recover compensation from the wrongdoer; and when the assured recovers compensation, the assured is entitled to first appropriate the same towards the balance of his loss (which was not received from the insurer) so that he gets full reimbursement of his loss and the cost, if any, incurred by him for such recovery. the insurer will be entitled only to whatever balance remaining, for reimbursement of what it paid to the assured.
15.2) in the second category, the subrogation is evidenced by an instrument. to avoid any dispute about the right to claim reimbursement, or to settle the priority of inter-se claims or to confirm the quantum of reimbursement in pursuance of the subrogation, and to ensure co-operation by the assured in suing the wrongdoer, the insurer usually obtains a letter of subrogation in writing, specifying its rights vis-`-vis the assured. the letter of subrogation is a contractual arrangement which crystallizes the rights of the insurer vis-`-vis the assignee. on execution of a letter of subrogation, the insurer becomes entitled to recover in terms of it, a sum not exceeding what was paid by it under the contract of insurance by suing in the name of the assured. even where the insurer had settled only a part of the loss incurred by the assured, on recovery of the claim from the wrongdoer, the insurer may, if the letter of subrogation so authorizes, first appropriate what it had paid to the assured and pay only the balance, if any, to the assured.
(`tp act' for short). section 6 of
18. we may clarify the position with reference to the following illustration: the loss to the assured is rs.1,00,000/-. the insurer settles the claim of the assured for rs.75,000/-. the wrong-doer is sued for recovery of rs.1,00,000/-.
where there is no letter of subrogation and insurer relies on the equitable doctrine of subrogation (the suit is filed by the assured)
(i) if the suit filed for recovery of rs.100,000/- is decreed as prayed, and the said sum of rs.1,00,000/- is recovered, the assured would appropriate rs. 25,000/- to recover the entire loss of rs. 100,000/- and the doctrine of subrogation would enable the insurer to claim and receive the balance of rs.75,000
(ii) if the suit filed for recovery of rs.100,000/- is decreed as prayed for, but the assured is able to recover only rs.50,000/- from the judgment-debtor (wrong-doer), the assured will be entitled to appropriate rs.25,000/- (which is the shortfall to make up rs.100,000/- being the loss) and the insurer will be entitled to receive only the balance of rs. 25,000/- even though it had paid rs. 75,000/- to the assured.
(iii) where, the suit is filed for recovery of rs.100,000/- but the court assesses the loss actually suffered by the assured as only rs.75,000/- (as against the claim of the assured that the value of goods lost is rs.100,000/-) and then awards rs.75,000/- plus costs, the insurer will be entitled to claim and receive the entire amount of rs.75,000/- in view of the doctrine of subrogation.
(iv) if the suit is filed for recovery of rs.1,00,000/-, and if the court grants rs.1,00,000/-, the insurer will take rs.75,000/- and the assured will take rs.25,000/-.
(v) if the insurer sues in the name of the assured for rs.75,000/- and recovers rs.75,000/-, the insurer will retain the entire sum of rs.75,000/- in pursuance of the letter of subrogation, even if the assured has not recovered the entire loss of rs.1,00,000/-. if the assured wants to recover the balance of the loss of rs.25,000/- as he had received only rs. 75,000/- from the insurer, the assured should ensure that the claim is made against the wrongdoer for the entire sum of rs.100,000/- by bearing the proportionate expense. otherwise the insurer will sue in the name of the assured for only for rs. 75,000/-.
(vi) if the letter of subrogation executed by the assured when the insurer settles the claim of the assured uses the words that the "assured assigns, transfers and abandons unto the insurer, the right to get rs.75,000/- from the wrong-doer", the document will be a `subrogation' in spite of the use of words `transfers, assigns and abandons'. this is because the insurer has settled the claim for rs.75,000/- and the instrument merely entitles the insurer to receive the said sum of rs.75,000/- which he had paid to the assured, and nothing more.
where the assured executes a letter of subrogation-cum- assignment for rs.100,000/-
(vii) if the document executed by the assured in favour of the insured provides that in consideration of the settlement of the claim for rs.75,000/-, the assured has transferred and assigned by way of subrogation and assignment, the right to recover the entire value of the goods lost and retain the entire amount without being accountable to the assured for any excess recovered (over and above rs.75,000/-) and provides that the insurer may sue in the name of the assured or sue in its own name without reference to the assured, the instrument is a subrogation-cum-assignment and the insurer has the choice of either suing in the name of the assured or in its own name.
where the assured executes a letter of assignment in favour of a third party to sue and recover from the carrier, the value of the consignment
20. in this context, it is necessary to remember that the nature of examination of a document may differ with reference to the context in which it is examined. if a document is examined to find out whether adequate stamp duty has been paid under the
.
21. at this juncture we should also take note of the fact that insurance companies, statutory corporations and banks use standardized forms to cover all types of situations and circumstances and several of the clauses in such forms may be wholly inapplicable to the transaction intended to be covered by the document. necessarily such redundant or inapplicable clauses should be ignored while trying examining the document and make sense out of it. to demonstrate this position, we extract below the letter of subrogation-cum-special power of attorney dated 15.2.1996 executed by the assured in this case, by highlighting the irrelevant clauses by bold letters:
23. let us now consider the decision in oberai. the assured therein had executed two documents in favour of the insurer, on settlement of the claim. the first was a letter of subrogation and the second was a special power of attorney. the letter of subrogation stated as follows :
the special power of attorney authorized the insurer to file a suit in court against the railway administration, for recovery of the claim on behalf of the assured, in the name of the assured, and to give a valid discharge and effectual receipt therefore. on the basis of the said documents, the complaint was initially filed by the insurer. subsequently, the assured was added as a party. though the claim of the assured therein was settled by the insurer for rs.64,137/- as against the consignment value of rs.93,925/-, the insurer appears to have sued for the full value of rs.93,925/- which was awarded by the district forum and affirmed by the national commission. this court held that where there is a subrogation simpliciter, the insurer can sue the wrong-doer in the name of the assured, and where there is an assignment, the insurer is entitled to sue the wrong-doer in his own name. this court held that the document executed by the assured though titled as `letter of subrogation' was, in fact, an assignment by the assured of its rights in favour of the insurer. this court held that the use of the following words in the document amounted to an absolute assignment, as contrasted from subrogation:
23.1) there is no doubt that the first portion which stated that all rights were assigned, transferred and abandoned in favour of the insurer and also empowered the insurer to sue in its own name, if read in isolation would amount to an assignment. but if those words are read with the other recitals and the words "in consideration of your paying to us the sum of rs.64,137/- only in full settlement of our claim for non-delivery/shortage and damage, under policy issued by you...." make it clear that it was a subrogation-cum-assignment. further, the second operative portion which states that "we hereby subrogate to you the same rights as we have in consequence of or arising from the said loss or damage" are not words of assignment. when the words used are : "we hereby subrogate to you" and not "we hereby transfer or assign in your favour", having regard to the settled meaning of "subrogate", the said words could not operate as an absolute assignment, but only as an subrogation. the genesis of the document is subrogation. the inclusion of an assignment is an additional right given to the insurer. the document did not cease to be a subrogation by reason of enlargement of subrogation by granting such additional right. in para 22 of the judgment, this court negatived the contention that the letter of subrogation and the special power of attorney should be read together and if so read, the document would be a subrogation. but the special power of attorney when read with the term in the letter of subrogation, "we hereby subrogate to you the same rights as we have in consequence of or arising from the said loss of damage" will certainly show that the document was intended to be a subrogation also and not a mere assignment. with great respect to the learned judges who decided oberai, it has to be held that oberai was not correctly decided, as it held a `subrogation-cum-assignment' as a mere `assignment'. it ignored the fact that, shorn of the cover and protection of subrogation, the document, if read as a simple assignment would fall foul of section 6(e) of
and thus would be unenforceable. but the ultimate decision in oberai may be correct as the complaint was filed by the insurer, in its own name and on its own behalf making a claim for the entire value of the goods, in excess of what was paid to the assured. though the assured was belatedly impleaded as a co-complainant, the nature and contents of the complaint was not apparently changed, and continued to be one by the insurer as assignee. on those peculiar facts, the finding that the complaint under
by the insurer (who was not a consumer) was not maintainable, was justified.
23.2) we may also refer to the frequent misconstruction of para 23 of the decision in oberai by some carriers. the said para does not mean that when the consignment is received by the carrier from the consignor and put it in the course of transportation, the carrier has provided the service and thereafter either ceases to be a service provider or ceases to be responsible for delivery of the goods, and that consequently, the consignor ceases to be a `consumer'. all that para 23 of oberai meant was that in a contract for carriage of goods between the consignor (assured) and the carrier, if the consignor assigns the right to claim damages to an assignee, after the goods are lost or damaged, the assignee cannot claim to be a "consumer" under
. it impliedly meant that if the assignment had been done before the loss or damage to the goods, then the assignment would have been in regard to `property' and not a mere right to sue, and the assignee as consignee would be entitled to sue the carrier. be that as it may.
25. we may also notice that section 2(d)
was amended by amendment act 62 of 2002 with effect from 15.3.2003, by adding the words "but does not include a person who avails of such services for any commercial purpose" in the definition of `consumer'. after the said amendment, if the service of the carrier had been availed for any commercial purpose, then the person availing the service will not be a `consumer' and consequently, complaints will not be maintainable in such cases. but the said amendment will not apply to complaints filed before the amendment.
re : question (d)
26. section 14(1)(d) of
