the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice surinder singh nijjar
1. this appeal has been filed by the state of uttar pradesh challenging the order passed by the high court of judicature at allahabad, in special appeal no.1202 of 2006 whereby the division bench of the high court observed that the action of the state in treating 367 vacancies belonging to the reserved category as backlog vacancies was legally not justified and further issued a direction to the state government to declare the result afresh in respect of these vacancies as if they are not backlog vacancies and that appointments may be offered in terms of the roster provided under notification dated 25th may, 2002 issued in exercise of powers under section 3 (5) of the u.p act no. 4 of 1994.
2. in order to appreciate the factual and legal controversies raised in this matter, it would be necessary to notice the various legislative provisions which govern the field of reservation in public services, in the state of uttar pradesh. initially, the reservation in public services in the state of uttar pradesh was regulated through various government orders, issued from time to time. the
(u.p. act no. 4 of 1994) (hereinafter referred to as "1994 act") was enacted by the state of uttar pradesh following the judgment of this court in indra sawhney vs. union of india, (1992) supp 3 scc 217
and the
and the
.
3. the
itself was amended by the
(u.p. act no. 21 of 2001). some provisions of this act were challenged in this court in a writ petition. this court, by interim order dated 21st january, 2002 directed that no executive order, in pursuance of the aforesaid act of 2001, shall be passed during the pendency of the writ petition. since a large number of vacancies in public service is lying vacant, the state of uttar pradesh decided to restore the original position as obtained under the
, i.e. before the amendment by the u.p. act no. 21 of 2001. thereafter, the governor of uttar pradesh on 6th june, 2002 promulgated the
. this was subsequently replaced by the
(u.p. act no. 1 of 2002).
4. under the
, very comprehensive provisions have been made to provide for reservation in public services and posts in favour of the person belonging to scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other backward classes of citizens and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. section 3 of the aforesaid act provides certain percentages of vacancies reserved for different categories of backward classes of citizens. the following percentages were prescribed:-
these vacancies were to be filled in accordance with the roster provided under sub-section 5 of section 3. the aforesaid percentages remained the same even under the amended section 3 as contained in the amendment act, 2002. in accordance with the aforesaid formula, a requisition was made by the irrigation department government of uttar pradesh on 20th october, 1999 to the uttar pradesh public service commission, for initiating the process of selection of candidates for the posts of junior engineer (civil). pursuant to this request, an advertisement was issued on 22nd december, 2000 for filling up 945 such posts. the last date for making the applications was 27th january, 2001. the break up of the said posts sought to be filled up was as follows:
477 general category
257 backward classes
200 schedule caste category
the written examinations were conducted on 22nd/23rd december, 2001. the aforesaid examination was conducted without taking into consideration the reorganization of the state of uttar pradesh and the creation of the state of uttaranchal on 9th november, 2000. there was a 2 per cent reduction in vacancies upon creation of the aforesaid new state. there was also an increase in the number of available vacancies by inclusion of the recruitment year 2003-2004. thus, the total number of posts against which the selection was to be conducted was reduced from 954 to 887. the break up was as follows:-
consequently, by letter dated 6th november, 2003, the state government informed the public service commission to take further action for selection of 887 posts for the year 2003-2004 as opposed to the earlier requisition for 954 posts. acting upon the aforesaid requisition, the result of the written examination was declared on 6th october, 2005.
thereafter by a letter dated 13th october, 2005, the government informed the public services commission that at the time of sending of the original requisition, the posts of reserved category have been incorrectly got included in the general selection process. therefore, the requisition be amended. in this requisition, the following description of the general selection posts was given and a request was made to initiate the process of selection:-
thereafter, the government addressed another letter dated 25th october, 2005 to the public service commission with a request to initiate the process of selection of the vacant posts meant exclusively for the reserved categories of scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and backward classes. it was stated that there are a total number of 367 posts in the aforesaid reserved categories for which, it was necessary to initiate the process of selection as a special recruitment. the break up of the posts category wise was:-
5. the public service commission, thereafter, initiated the selection process by incorporating the various changes noticed above. consequently, an option was given to the reserved category candidates as to their choice for being considered against the 520 posts of general recruitment or against 367 posts of special recruitment meant exclusively for the reserved category. the reserved category candidates appear to have given their option for the special recruitment category of 367 posts. the interview was held thereafter between 21st november, 2005 to 12th january, 2006 for 520 posts for general recruitment and 367 posts for special recruitment. the final results were declared on 12th march, 2006. it is not disputed that respondent no. 1 to 3 and 5 had qualified in the written examination and had appeared in the interview. it is also not disputed that all these respondents remained unsuccessful in the final selection.
6. aggrieved by the exclusion of 367 posts for the special recruitment, eight unsuccessful candidates belonging to the general category filed four writ petitions in the high court of judicature at allahabad. it was the claim of the writ petitioners that the advertisement dated 20th/22nd december, 2000 was to fill the 954 posts, which was subsequently modified to 887. 50 per cent of the posts were reserved for different categories of scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other backward classes. the petitioners had no grievance about the reduction of vacancies as indicated above. they also do not have any grievance about the 50 per cent of the posts reserved for the different categories. the only grievance made by the writ petitioners is the exclusion of 367 vacancies on the basis that they are backlog vacancies which have remained unfilled and are to be filled up by way of a special recruitment. according to them, by exclusion of 367 vacancies, the total vacancies for the general recruitment have been reduced to 520. this has unnecessarily resulted in a reduction of the posts which could be filled by all the categories in the general recruitment. the petitioners claimed that the exclusion of 367 vacancies from the general recruitment was without any legal sanction. it was the case of the petitioners that a vacancy can only be declared as a backlog vacancy provided there was a complete selection procedure in any recruitment year and the vacancy remained unfilled. since there had been no efforts earlier to fill in all the 367 posts and declared as backlog, the exclusion of the same from the general recruitment was illegal.
7. the learned single judge upon consideration of the various facts concluded that the general strength of the cadre being 4217 posts, 50 per cent of the general category would be 2066 posts. out of these 2066 posts, 1808 posts were already occupied and only 260 posts were available for the non-reserved category. the learned single judge further observed that in view of the number of posts occupied by the general category, it cannot be said that there has been any choking of the general category as indicated in the case of indra sawhney
8. the learned single judge concluded that the 50 per cent limit as provided in the second proviso has not been transgressed by the state in offering the 367 vacancies for special recruitment as backlog vacancies. it is, however, observed that the state government ought to undertake the exercise of carrying out the calculation of the exact number of vacancies on the basis of the roster provided under section 3, sub-section 5 of the
. the writ petitions were disposed of with the aforesaid observations.
9. aggrieved against the aforesaid, the writ petitioners preferred special appeal no. 1202 of 2006 before the division bench. the division bench recorded the following conclusions:-
10. we have heard the counsel for the parties.
11. mr. dwivedi appearing for the state of u.p. submits that the directions issued by the division bench would only unsettle the settled position. he submits that 703 posts have been filled up against 887 posts that were advertised. further 183 posts would be filled in compliance with the interim order of the division bench. all the selected candidates have joined and have completed almost three years of service. the implementation of the directions of the high court would create legal as well as administrative complication. he further submits that 367 posts which were segregated for special recruitment do not, in any manner, infringe the rights of the general category candidates. according to him, a conjoint reading of the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 3 and sub-sections (2) and (5) of the said section makes it abundantly clear that so long as the reservation does not exceed 50 per cent of the cadre strength, the general category candidates can have no objection in the special recruitment undertaken in order to complete the 100 points roster. according to the learned counsel, the division bench has misconstrued section 3 in concluding that the action of the state government in treating 367 vacancies as backlog was legally not justified.
12. making a reference to the letter dated 4th july, 2006, it was submitted by mr. dwivedi that the state has endeavoured to achieve the object of the reservation without prejudicing the claim of the general category candidates. he pointed out that out of the total sanctioned strength of the cadre of 4127 posts, 50 per cent for general category would be 2066 posts. out of that share, the general category already occupied 1808 posts leaving a balance of 260 posts which were available to be filled up for general category. under the earlier advertisement dated 22nd of december, 2000, the break up of the vacancies was as under :
this would have been in excess of 50 per cent which is impermissible under the law settled by this court in the case of indra sawhney
as amended by act no. 1 of 2002. the total number of vacancies were reduced to 887 out of which 520 earmarked for general recruitment to ensure that the general category gets 260 vacancies i.e. 50 per cent of the total available vacancies in the cadre. remaining 367 vacancies were treated as backlog vacancies for the reserved categories. merely because the vacancies were not advertised would not render the action of the state government illegal. mr. dwivedi also submits that all the appellants having participated in the selection process cannot be permitted to challenge the same merely because they have remained unsuccessful. this apart, no relief could have been given to the appellants as the selected candidates have not been made parties.
