the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice r. v. raveendran
1. application for substitution allowed. the appellants are permitted to bring the legal heirs of the deceased respondent on record. cause title to be amended. heard.
2. the respondent, a diploma holder in mechanical engineering belonging to a schedule caste, while working as a senior section engineer, signal and telecommunications, southern railways, in the year 1976, was considered alongwith others, for adhoc promotion to the post of asst. signal and telecommunication engineer ('aste' for short). those who passed the medical examination (which included the tests to find out whether the candidates were not suffering from colour blindness) were given ad hoc promotions. however the medical examination report of respondent showed that he was colour blind and, therefore, he was not given ad hoc promotion as aste.
3. in the year 1980, the respondent appeared for the written examination for regular promotion to class ii group 'b' services (including aste), but failed to qualify and was not promoted. according to the respondent, three other schedule caste candidates who were earlier given ad hoc promotion as aste, and who also had failed in the written examination, were promoted in view of the policy of the government to select the best among the failed schedule caste candidates. according to respondent, if he had been given the ad hoc promotion in the year 1976, he would have had a better chance of been considered for regular promotion as aste inspite of failing in the written examination.
4. in 1981, the post of aste was declared to be a 'safety category' post, which meant that the candidates should be free from colour blindness apart from being medically fit. though there were several subsequent examinations for promotion to the post of aste, the respondent did not participate. after 1976, the respondent, however, made several attempts to find a cure for the colour blindness and continued to consult various doctors in india and abroad.
5. when the respondent acquired a b.e. degree in the year 1998, he was sent for medical examination for being empanelled as an eligible candidate for group 'b' promotion. the report of medical board was favourable. he was therefore promoted as asst. works manager on ad hoc basis on 24.9.1998. thereafter the respondent gave representations dated 28.12.1998 and 3.9.1999 contending that he was unjustly refused ad hoc promotion in 1976 on the ground of colour blindness and he should be given such promotion as aste with retrospective effect from 1976, as also all consequential promotions. as that request was not acceded, the respondent filed an application before the central administrative tribunal, chennai ('tribunal' for short) in oa no.1267/1999 praying for a direction to the appellants to promote him to the post of deputy chief, s & t workshop padanur, by granting him the several promotions to which he would have been entitled form 1976, if he was not colour blind. in the said application, he alleged that the medical examination carried out in the year 1976 was done carelessly and negligently, thereby denying him the opportunity of being promoted as aste on ad hoc basis; and that, therefore the appellants ought to redress his grievance by giving all promotions to which he was entitled and deserved on the basis of his seniority. according to him if he had been promoted as aste in the year 1976, by the year 1999, he would have secured several further promotions and reached the position of deputy chief, s & t workshop. the said application was disposed of by the tribunal by order dated 22.12.1999 with a direction to consider his pending representations seeking promotion.
6. in compliance with the said direction, the general manager, southern railway considered his representation and sent the following communication dated 8.2.2000 to the respondent:
"the old records have been traced out. they clearly reveal that you were having colour blindness, you also had accepted the same and had sought for permission to use "x-chrom" contact lens used for colour blindness available only in usa vide your letter dated 8.11.1976.
probably with correction of such defect in vision you could have been declared fit in the medical examination held in the year 1998.
accordingly, it is proposed to direct you for a special medical examination by a committee to be appointed by cmd shortly."
7. respondent again approached the tribunal by filing oa no.460/2000 for quashing the order dated 8.2.2000 and seeking a direction to the appellants to promote him to the post of deputy chief, s & t workshop with retrospective effect from 1991 when his promotion to the said post became due. in this application, he reiterated the averments and contentions made in the earlier application (oa no.1267/1999).
8. in the meanwhile, the respondent was sent for medical examination to the medical director, souther railway hospital, perambur, as decided in the order dated 8.2.2000, who in turn referred him for a comprehensive testing for colour blindness. a team of experts in shankara netralaya, a renowned eye centre in chennai examined him, using the latest equipments and found his colour blindness to be minimal, which would not interfere or affect his work.
9. the tribunal dismissed the respondent's application (oa no.460/2000) by order dated 18.10.2000. the tribunal held that if the respondent was aggrieved by his non-promotion as aste on ad hoc basis in the year 1976, he should not have kept quiet for more than 23 years and it was not open for the respondent to seek reopening of the issue in the year 1999-2000. the tribunal also held that the medical examination in 1976 was only with reference to a proposed ad hoc promotion for a temporary period, and as the respondent had failed in the written examination for regular promotion in the year 1980 and thereafter failed to appear in any of the promotional examinations, he could not make a grievance in regard to non-promotion to the post of aste.
10. the respondent challenged the decision of the tribunal in wp no.407/2001. during the pendency of the writ petition the respondent was given a promotion as astc on 22.11.2002 and he retired from service on 30.4.2003. a division bench of the madras high court ultimately disposed of the said writ petition by the impugned order dated 10.3.2004 recording the following findings:
a) colour blindness is incurable. the finding in 1998 and 2000 that the respondent was not colour blind, led to an inference that the earlier diagnosis in 1976 that he was colour blind, was erroneous.
b) but, even if he had been found to be not colour blind and medically fit in the year 1976, the respondent would have held the position of aste only on ad hoc basis, till regular promotions were made. unless he succeeded in the regular written examination and fulfilled the minimum standards for promotion, he would not have been promoted as aste on regular basis. the respondent failed in the examination held in the year 1980-81 even after relaxing the standards and therefore he would not have been promoted as aste even if he was not colour blind and therefore the contention of the respondent that he had lost further promotions could not be accepted.
c) the post of aste was categorised as a safety post in the year 1981; that as the safety of the persons who used the railways was of paramount importance, and the medical opinion was that the respondent was colour blind, it could not be said that the action of the appellants in not promoting him on ad hoc basis in the year 1976, was illegal. there was no mala fides on the part of the railways in not promoting him on ad hoc basis in 1976, and the appellants had not intentionally withheld any benefit legally due to the respondent.
d) having regard to the nature and standard of eye testing equipments that were available in 1976, the opinion of the doctors that the respondent was colour blind, was rendered bonafide and could not be said to be on account of lack of competence or negligence and would not furnish any cause of action to the respondent for seeking any relief. the fact that more than two decades later, by using technologically advanced testing equipments, a team of doctors in an internationally renowned hospital had found that he was not suffering from marked colour blindness, merely showed the second diagnosis was on account of comprehensive examination procedure with technologically advanced equipment available at that stage, and did not establish that the opinion in 1976 was mala fide or negligent.
e) however the respondent had been denied the opportunity of holding the higher post of aste on ad hoc basis from 1976-1981 on account of the medical opinion of 1976. if he had been permitted to hold the post of aste on ad hoc basis from 1976 to 1981, he might have possibly succeeded in the examination held in 1980-81 and promoted as aste on regular basis.
f) as the respondent became aware of the fact that he was not colour blind only in the year 1998, his applications for relief filed in 1999 and 2000 could not be termed as suffering from laches.
the high court held that on account of the fact that diagnosis in 1976 had denied him advancement in his career it was necessary to compensate him for the loss of opportunity and mental agony and therefore directed the appellants to pay a sum of rs.two lakhs as compensation to the respondent. the said order is challenged in this appeal by special leave.
11. on the contentions raised, the following questinos arise for our consideration:
(i) whether the claim of the respondent ought to have been dismissed on the ground of delay and laches?
(iii) on the facts and circumstances whether the high court was justified in awarding a compensation of rs.two lakhs to the respondent?
re: question (i)
12.
13.
x x x
re: question (ii)
15. the fact that the respondent was subjected to medical examination in 1976 and that he was found to be colour blind is not disputed. the respondent did not challenge his non-promotion as ad hoc aste or the medical report that he was colour blind. he appeared for the examination in 1980 and failed. according to him, in a subsequent medical examination in the year 1998, he was found to be normal and a further detailed medical examination in 2000 showed his colour blindness was minimal which would not affect discharge of his duties as aste. the respondent therefore wants the court to infer that the 1976 diagnosis of colour blindness was erroneous and he could not be made to suffer due to the negligence of the then medical board.
16.
17. we extract the relevant portion of the test report of shankara netralaya given on 11.3.2000 (extracted by the respondent in his counter affidavit):
(emphasis supplied)
18.
re: question (iii)
19.
20. we, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the order of the high court and restore the order of the tribunal dismissing the original application filed by the respondent. if any terminal benefits are withheld in view of this litigation, the same should be released without further delay if there is no other objection/claim.
