the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice dr. mukundakam sharma
1. the short question which arises for determination in this civil appeal filed by the assessee under section 35l(b) of the
2. the present appeal filed by the appellant - assessee herein under section 35l(b) of the
(hereinafter referred to as 'the act') arises out of an order dated 16.05.2002 passed by the customs, excise gold control appellate tribunal, west zonal bench at mumbai (hereinafter referred to as 'the cegat') in appeal no. e/2404/96-bom holding that "crude vitamin a" is marketable and hence liable to duty.
3. the appellant - assessee is engaged in the manufacture of vitamin a in a finished and marketable form. these are cleared on payment of applicable excise duties under heading 29.36 of the schedule to the
. the assessee is also engaged in the manufacture of animal feed supplements with the brand name 'rovimix' (now called 'endomie') and 'rovibe' (now called 'endobee').
5. five show cause notices were issued to the appellant demanding excise duty on the product in question consumed by the appellant in the manufacture of animal feed supplements. adjudicating upon these five show cause notices issued to the appellant, the commissioner confirmed the liability to duty for the goods manufactured and cleared between december 1989 and february 1995 and imposed a penalty on the appellant. the relevant portion of the finding of the commissioner is reproduced herein :
6. the tribunal considered the entire facts and the records and on appreciation thereof, upheld the finding of the commissioner. the tribunal also considered the fact that nobody would manufacture a pharmaceutical of such purity unless the manufacturer was interested in its sale. the tribunal however remanded the matter back to the adjudicating authorities for the purposes of determining the valuation of the products in question.
7. so far the other issue with regard to demands being barred by limitation was concerned, the tribunal held that the show cause notice dated 29.12.1994 would be barred by limitation for the period from february 1993 to october 1993 but so far other three notices relating to the period november 1994 to april 1994, may 1994 to october 1994 and november 1994 to february 1995 were concerned, they were held to be within limitation. the aforesaid findings and conclusions arrived at by the tribunal are under challenge in this appeal on which we heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties.
