the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice r. v. raveendran
1. notice to respondents was issued limited to the question whether the high court ought to have decreed the appellant's suit for declaration and consequential injunction at least in respect of the portion of the suit property which was allotted to the share of second respondent in the earlier partition suit filed by the first respondent. leave is granted only in regard to that question.
2. the appellant was the plaintiff in a suit for declaration of title and permanent injunction in regard to the suit property, that is, a plot measuring east to west : 49 feet and north south 81 feet, total extent of 3969 sq.ft (forming part of natham survey no. 178 (new no. 137-138) of a total extent of 4 acres 25 cents situated at kakkalur village, tiruvallur taluk and district). the appellant filed the said suit in the year 2000 in the court of subordinate judge, thiruvallur (os no.68/2000) subsequently transferred and renumbered as os no. 138 of 2004 on the file of the district munsiff, thiruvallur.
3. the case of appellant in brief is as under: that the suit property was purchased by the second respondent under sale deed dated 4.3.1957; that she was in possession and enjoyment of the suit property as absolute owner and had mortgaged it in favour of appellant's sister (t.n. latha) on 30.6.1983; that second respondent sold the suit property in favour of the appellant under sale deed dated 11.4.1990 and delivered possession thereof to him in pursuance of the sale; that though the suit property was the self acquired property of the second respondent, the first respondent who is her step- daughter, filed a collusive suit against the second respondent in os no. 8/1985 on the file of the sub-ordinate judge, thiruvallur alleging that the suit property and several other properties belonged to her father ekambara reddy and that she and second respondent had each an half share in those properties; that the appellant is a bona fide purchaser of the suit property from second respondent and he was unaware of the pendency of the said suit for partition in o.s. no.8/1985; that subsequently the said suit for partition filed by the first respondent was decreed vide preliminary decree dated 17.3.1994 holding that the first respondent was entitled to half share in the properties described as items 1 to 6 in the partition suit schedule (which included the suit property (as item no.6); that in the final decree proceedings, a commissioner was appointed to divide the properties; that on the basis of the commissioner's report, a final decree was passed on 7.4.2000 dividing the properties; that on account of collusion between first and second respondents, the commissioner's report divided the suit property in a manner that nearly three fourth portion of the suit property was allotted to the share of the first respondent and only about a one-fourth portion was allotted to the share of the second respondent; and that adversely affected his right and title to the suit property and therefore it became necessary for him to file a suit for declaration of his right and title to the suit property with a consequential permanent injunction.
4. the first respondent resisted the suit contending that the appellant had purchased the suit property during the pendency of her suit for partition and that being a purchaser pendente lite, the sale in his favour was hit by the doctrine of lis pendens and therefore he could not claim any right in the suit property. she asserted that the suit property was not the self-acquired property of the second respondent, and that the suit property was purchased by her father in the name of the second respondent. she denied that there was any collusion between her and the second respondent. the second respondent did not contest the suit.
5. the trial court by judgment dated 6.7.2005 dismissed the appellant's suit. it held that the suit property was not the self acquired property of second respondent and that there was no collusion between first and second respondents; and that the appellant having purchased the suit property under sale dated 11.4.1990 during the pendency of the suit for partition (os no.8/1985) filed by the first respondent against the second respondent, the sale in his favour was hit by the doctrine of lis pendens and that therefore the appellant did not get any title to the suit property and he was not entitled to the relief of declaration and injunction sought by him. the appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed by the first appellate court by judgment and decree dated 26.3.2008. the second appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed by the high court by the impugned judgment dated 1.9.2009 by holding that appellant was a pendente lite purchaser, attracting the doctrine of lis pendens under section 52 of
('act' for short) and therefore the courts below were justified in ignoring the purchase by appellant. feeling aggrieved the appellant filed the present appeal.
6. the partition suit was decreed holding that the first respondent was entitled to half share in the six properties which were the subject matter of partition suit including the suit property. in the final decree proceedings, an equitable division was made accepting the report of the commissioner who had divided the suit property as per the sketch (ex. c-5) resulting in approximately three-fourth of the suit property (vacant site portion) being allotted to the first respondent and only the remaining one-fourth of the suit property (site with house thereon) being allotted to the second respondent. the contention of the appellant that the partition suit by the first respondent against the second respondent was collusive, and that the suit property was the self acquired property of the second respondent and the first respondent did not have a share therein, have been concurrently negatived. the alternative contention of the appellant that even if the first respondent had a half share therein, the division and allotment of the properties in the partition suit ought to have been made in a manner that the entire suit property was allotted to the share of second respondent to work out equities, was also negatived by the courts below.
7. as per the report of commissioner, schedule items 1 to 5 in the partition suit were agricultural lands in all measuring 44 cents (less than half an acre) and they were divided equally by allotting 22 cents to first respondent and 22 cents to second respondent. item no.6 was a house site with a house in the north western portion. as per the commissioner's sketch (ex.c-5), it measured east to west, 48'3" on the northern side and 53'3" on the southern side and north to south : 53'9" on the eastern side and 60'3" on the western side. the entire plot was shown by the letters 'a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, a' and as per the final decree based on the commissioner's report, the north western portion shown by the letters a, b, i, h, a measuring east to west: 24' on the north and 24'9" on the south, and north to south : 28'9" on the east and 29' on the west with the house thereon (measuring 16' x 27'3") was allotted to the share of the second respondent; and the entire remaining portion which was of an inverted l shape shown by the letters b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, b was allotted to the share of the first respondent. as items 1 to 5 in the partition suit schedule were small agricultural lands, they were equally divided and it was not possible to allot item no.6 in entirety to the second respondent.
8. the trial court, first appellate court and the high court on appreciating the evidence have held that the partition suit was not collusive. there was a valid reason for a larger portion of item no.6 being allotted to first respondent, as the portion allotted to the second respondent had a house therein and to equalize the value, a larger portion (vacant plot) was allotted to first respondent. therefore this court found no reason to interfere on that score and issued notice in the special leave petition restricted to the question whether the appellant should have been granted a decree at least in regard to the one-fourth portion in the suit property that was allotted to the second respondent instead of non-suiting him in entirety. that limited issue alone arises for our consideration.
11.
12.
a related suggestion to the law makers
14. it is of some interest that a solution has been found to this problem in the states of maharashtra by an appropriate local amendment to section 52 of
conclusion
16. we accordingly allow this appeal in part and set aside that part of the judgment of the high court holding that the appellant-plaintiff is not entitled to any relief. instead, the suit is decreed in part and declaration of title with consequential permanent injunction as prayed is granted in regard to that portion of the suit property that was allotted to the second respondent in the partition suit, that is portion shown as a, b, i, h, a in ex.c-5 (commissioner's sketch) in o.s.no.8/1985. parties to bear their respective costs.
