the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice r. v. raveendran
1. leave granted.
2. the appellant was selected and appointed as a constable in the central reserve police force on 12.6.2003. rule 14(b) of the
required every newly recruited employee to furnish factual information about himself. in view of it, the appellant was required to fill up and sign a verification roll (for short 'the form'), which he did on 6.7.2004. the form starts with the following warnings :
[vernacular portion deleted]
the appellant answered both these questions in the negative by writing 'nahin' (i.e. 'no'). the form was filled in hindi, a language understood by the appellant.
3. the said form was referred to the police for verification, who reported that crime case no.67/1997 had been registered against the appellant in the police station, bahariya, for offences punishable under sections 323/504/506
and that the court had however discharged him on 17.1.2001, after trial.
4. in view of the said report, the fifth respondent (addl. dy.ig,crpf, allahabad) issued a notice dated 27.5.2005 alleging that the appellant had given false information in the verification form by concealing facts and called upon him to show cause why his services should not be terminated. the appellant sent a reply dated 4.6.2005 stating that the relevant clause in the verification form required him to disclose whether any criminal case registered against him was pending before any court and whether he had been convicted by any court; and that as he was discharged in the criminal case and as no case was pending against him before any court or authority, and as he was never sent to jail, he had answered the relevant query in the negative and that he had not misrepresented or suppressed any fact nor given false information.
5. by order dated 25.6.2005, the fifth respondent terminated the services of the appellant under rule 5(1) of the
. the departmental appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed by the inspector general of police, crpf, lucknow (third respondent herein), by order dated 23.9.2005. thereafter the appellant filed a writ petition challenging the order of termination which was dismissed by the high court by the impugned order dated 3.8.2006. the high court held that the appellant ought to have answered the query 12(a) as "yes" and furnished the particulars of the criminal prosecution even if he had been acquitted in the criminal case. it was of the view that as he was prosecuted in a criminal case, appellant's answer to query 12(a) as 'no' amounted to concealment of relevant information and therefore his termination from service was justified. the said order is challenged in this appeal by special leave. the question is whether termination of the service of appellant was justified.
6.1) in kendriya vidyalaya sangathan v. ram ratan yadav - 2003 (3) scc 437
6.2) in r. radhakrishnan vs. director general of police - 2008 (1) scc 660
6.3. in union of india vs. bipad bhanjan gayen - 2008 (11) scc 314
7. on the other hand, where the non-furnishing of material information is due to absence of clarifying the question or due to the candidate not being aware of the said information, it cannot be said that he had suppressed material information or made false statements.
7.1) in secretary, department of home, a.p. vs. b. chinnam naidu - 2005 (2) scc 746
7.2) in state of haryana v. dinesh kumar - 2008 (3) scc 222
8. rule 14 of the
, relevant in this case relates to verification. clauses (a) and (b) of the said rule are extracted below :
position in this case
11. the respondents contended that the decision of high court was in consonance with the principles laid down in several decisions of this court and therefore, did not call for interference. the appellant on the other hand contended that the decision in kendriya vidyalaya sangathan, was distinguishable. he drew our attention to the nature of the queries in that case. the following were the two queries in the verification form relating to antecedents and character :
the appellant contended that the said queries (12) and (13) in kendriya vidyalaya sangathan, were simple and clear; and that this court had also found in that case that the employee, who answered the said queries in the negative and thereby misrepresented the facts, was highly qualified (holding ba, b.ed. and m.ed. degrees) and had therefore rejected the contention that he could not understand the queries.
12. the appellant submitted that in this case questions 12(a) and (b) in the verification form were complex, ambiguous, tangled, involved and confusing for the following reasons :
13. we agree that the english version of the questions were involved and confusing. if the queries in 12(a) and (b) in this case had been split into separate questions with instructions, to provide clarity and precision, there would have been no room for controversy. for example, if questions 12(a) and (b) had been split up into five separate questions with a note as follows, there would have been no confusion or ambiguity :
a) have you ever been arrested or prosecuted or kept under detention?
b) have you ever been bound down or fined or convicted by a court of law for any offence ?
c) have you ever been debarred or disqualified by any public service commission from appearing in any of its examinations or selections ?
d) have you ever been debarred from taking any examination by any university, or expelled or rusticated from any educational institution ?
15. but in this case, the appellant is not entitled to any benefit of doubt on the question whether he knew the meaning and purport of questions 12(a) and (b). even assuming that there was ambiguity in the english version of the questions, a reading of the hindi version of the questions shows a clear indication of the information that was required to be furnished by the declarant. the appellant read the questions in hindi and answered them in hindi. we extract below an english translation of query 12(a) in hindi to show that there was no ambiguity in regard to the question :
english translation of the question in hindi
(emphasis supplied)
the fact that a criminal case was registered against the appellant is not disputed. the fact that no criminal case was pending against him, when he gave the verification declaration in the year 2004, or the fact that he was not convicted or fined or bound down in any case, loses relevance, when he clearly suppressed the material fact that he was prosecuted and thereby made a false statement. though the english version of the questions could have used a little more clarity, we cannot agree with the contention that he was misled into answering the question wrongly, as the hindi version of the questions which were answered by the appellant did not suffer from any vagueness or ambiguity.
16. we are satisfied that the appellant had knowingly made a false statement that he was not prosecuted in any criminal case. therefore, the employer (crpf) was justified in dispensing with his services for not being truthful in giving material information regarding his antecedents which were relevant for employment in a uniformed service, and that itself justified his discharge from service. consequently, we dismiss this appeal as having no merit.
