the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice r. m. lodha
1. leave granted.
3. smt. anita anant sawant - the sole respondent filed a suit for possession under section 6 of the
(for short `the act') in respect of portion of property being gram panchayat house no. 97 situated on land bearing gat no. 1, hissa no. 61, village ambet, taluka mahasala, district raigad, against the appellants and their predecessors-in-title (hereinafter referred to as `the contesting defendants') and one smt. nanibai shankar sawant, since deceased, (hereinafter referred to as `defendant no. 4'). the plaintiff averred in the plaint that she purchased the entire house no. 97 from defendant no. 4 by registered sale deed on october 1, 1981. at the time of purchase, part of house no. 97 was in possession of pandurang vichare who vacated that portion and she came into possession of entire house. later on, she let out southern side one room along with hall adjacent to padavi and northern side room of hall (for short `suit property') to one p.v. warik. on october 1, 1988, the contesting defendants forcibly dispossessed the tenant - p.v. warik, threw away his articles and took possession of the suit property. the plaintiff, thus, prayed for recovery of possession of the suit property of which her tenant was forcibly dispossessed. the contesting defendants filed written statement and traversed plaintiff's claim by stating that suit property was joint family property and defendant no. 4 had no authority to sell the said house to the plaintiff. the contesting defendants, thus, claimed that they were co-owners and in possession of the entire house no. 97. defendant no. 4 set up the plea that no consideration was paid to her for the sale of house no. 97 and that sale deed was obtained by fraud. it transpires, on the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the trial court framed as many as six issues, including that of title to property although such issue was unnecessary. the trial court, after recording the evidence and hearing the parties, held that plaintiff was able to prove her dispossession on october 1, 1988 by the contesting defendants from the suit property and that she could maintain the suit under section 6 of
against the contesting defendants as she was in possession through a tenant over the suit property. the trial court, accordingly, vide its judgment and decree dated july 31, 2001, directed the contesting defendants to handover the possession of the suit property to the plaintiff.
4. the contesting defendants challenged the judgment and decree of the trial court by filing revision application before the high court of judicature at bombay. it may be noticed here that defendant no. 4 had already died during the pendency of suit and her legal representatives were brought on record, but later on they were deleted from array of parties in the revision application. inter alia, the contention raised before the high court was that if the tenant of the plaintiff was forcibly dispossessed, the suit under section 6 of
could be filed by the tenant and not by the landlady. the high court did not accept the contention of the contesting defendants and held that in view of the language of section 6 of
, either the tenant who was actually dispossessed or the plaintiff being landlady could file the suit. the high court, thus, by its judgment dated march 28, 2008 dismissed the revision application. it is from this judgment that the present appeal by special leave arises.
5. section 6 of
reads as under:-
6. section 6 corresponds to section 9 of the repealed
(for short, `1877 act'). the question whether a landlord can sue a trespasser for immediate possession where his tenant has been dispossessed has come up for consideration before various high courts with reference to section 9 of the
. section 9 of the
7. in veeraswami mudali v. p.r. venkatachala mudali and others, air 1926 madras 18
8. the division bench of additional judicial commissioners, nagpur, in ramchandra v. sambashiv, air 1928 nagpur 313
, held that a landlord cannot sue under section 9 to recover possession of the land because he was not in possession of it and was not dispossessed of it.
9. in (kanneganti) ramamanemma v. (kanneganti) basavayya, air 1934 madras 558
10. contrary to the aforesaid view of the madras high court and nagpur judicial commissioner, the high courts of calcutta, bombay, patna, pepsu and rajasthan have taken the view that a landlord can maintain a suit under section 9 of the
to recover possession where his tenant in exclusive possession has been dispossessed forcibly by the act of a third party.
thus:
13. in sailesh kumar and another v. rama devi, air 1952 patna 339
against trespasser for immediate possession when, at the date of dispossession, the house was in occupation of a tenant entitled to its exclusive use, in affirmative. the division bench considered the matter thus:-
14. in the case of gobind ram jamna dass v. mst. mewa w/o parbhati, air 1953 pepsu 188
15. the single judge of rajasthan high court in raghuvar dayal v. hargovind and another, air 1958 rajasthan 287
can be brought by a landlord even when the property is in possession of the tenant. the single judge followed the afore-referred decisions of bombay, pepsu and patna high courts and reiterated the legal position as follows:-
16. as noticed above, the views of the high courts differ about maintainability of suit for possession by the landlord under section 9 of
in respect of property let out to the tenant who has been dispossessed forcibly by a third party. that language of section 6(1) of
and first paragraph of section 9 of
17. in halsbury's laws of england (fourth edition, page 617 - para 1111), `physical and legal possession' is distinguished as under:
18. pollock and wright in their classic work, `an essay on possession in the common law' (1888 edition, page 27) explained the nature of possession, inter alia, as follows:
21. in the result, appeal fails and is dismissed with no order as to costs.
