(non-reportable)
the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice anil r. dave
1. leave granted.
2. being aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 7th february, 2005 in cwp no.3267 of 2004 passed by the high court of punjab and haryana at chandigarh, this appeal has been filed by khalsa high school, mansa, district mansa, punjab, through its manager.
4. respondent nos. 3 to 7 were appointed on probation as teachers by the management of the appellant's school. they were appointed on probation with a clear understanding that they were to remain on probation for a period of one year and if during the said period of probation, their work was not found to be satisfactory, their services would be terminated. the said fact had been incorporated in their appointment orders and the said understanding was also in consonance with the provisions of rule 8 of the
(hereinafter referred to as 'the rules'). as work of the said teachers was not found to be satisfactory, the period of probation was extended by a further period of six months, but even during the extended period, their work was not found to be satisfactory and, therefore, services of the said teachers had been terminated without stigmatizing them in the orders, whereby their services were terminated.
5. being aggrieved by the order of termination, the said respondents had approached the director public instructions (schools) punjab by way of a representation and even before the representation could be decided, they approached the punjab state school tribunal by filing an appeal against the orders of termination. the tribunal had passed an interim order dated 13th february, 2003 whereby the appellant was restrained from terminating services of the respondent-teachers.
6. ultimately, the tribunal by an order dated 27th january, 2004 had allowed the appeal and had directed the appellant-school to reinstate the teachers with back-wages. the said order was challenged by the appellant by filing cwp no.3267 of 2004 in the high court of punjab and haryana and the said petition was rejected by an order dated february 7, 2005.
7. the tribunal had allowed the appeal by considering the termination as the penal. according to the tribunal, departmental inquiry ought to have been held before termination of services of the teachers. moreover, no approval of the director was obtained as required under the provisions of section 4 of the
(hereinafter referred to 'the act') and, therefore, also the orders of termination were bad in law.
8. the aforestated order passed by the tribunal was confirmed by the high court.
