the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice tarun chatterjee
1. delay condoned.
2. leave granted.
3. this appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 9th of may, 2006, passed in second appeal no.198 of 2000 of the high court of kerala at ernakulam, by which the high court had affirmed the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the courts below in a suit for declaration of easement rights in respect of `b' schedule property of the plaint as a pathway to the `a' schedule property of the plaint.
4. it may be mentioned that during the pendency of the second appeal before the high court of kerala, the original plaintiff expired and his legal representatives were brought on record as substituted respondents before the high court, who are respondents in this appeal. for the sake of convenience, the appellants herein would be referred to as `the defendants' as they were in the original suit for declaration of easement and permanent injunction filed by the original plaintiff, who is now represented by the respondents herein.
5. the case that was made out by the plaintiff (since deceased), in his plaint was as follows: plaint a and b schedule properties originally formed part of a vast extent of properties which belonged to one yogini amma. during the life time of yogini amma, she was in enjoyment and management of the entire property for the benefit of the first defendant ashramam. on her death, her brother and sole legal heir krishna pillai and other disciples executed a settlement deed dated 20th of june, 1948 as per the directions of the deceased yogini amma. as per the settlement, the schedule `a' property of the plaint was allotted to the original plaintiff (since deceased). even thereafter, the original plaintiff (since deceased) continued to be in possession and enjoyment of the said properties effecting mutation and paying taxes. even before the settlement deed was executed, during the life time of the said yogini amma, there is a building being `a' schedule property of the plaint that was in occupation of the original plaintiff (since deceased). there is a gate provided on the south western portion of the `a' schedule property for ingress and egress to the same and `b' schedule property of the plaint which is a pathway extends up to the road on the west from the said gate. the said gate and `b' schedule pathway are as old as the building in `a' schedule property of the plaint. other than `b' schedule pathway, there is no other means of direct or indirect access to `a' schedule property of the plaint from any road or pathway. the `b' schedule pathway of the plaint was granted to the original plaintiff (since deceased) as easement right by the said yogini amma and the original plaintiff (since deceased) continued to use it as such from time immemorial. this pathway is situated within the property which is now under the control and use of the defendants. defendant nos. 2 to 4 tried to close down the gate on the south western extremity of the b schedule pathway and were also attempting to change the nature and existence of the `b' schedule property of the plaint. an attempt in that direction was made on 21st of july, 1982. original plaintiff (since deceased) apprehended that defendant nos. 2 to 4 might forcibly close down the pathway. hence, he filed a suit for declaration of easement of necessity or of grant and permanent injunction restraining the defendants from obstructing the `b' schedule pathway and for other incidental reliefs.
6. the defendant no.1 was the matathipadhi of the ashramam; defendant nos. 2 and 3 were its office bearers and defendant no.4 was only an inmate of the ashramam. defendant nos. 1 to 4 entered appearance and filed a joint written statement praying for dismissal of the suit by making the following defence:
the suit was not maintainable. the description of `a' schedule and `b' schedule properties was incorrect. the original plaintiff (since deceased) was attached to the institution from his childhood. in consideration of the love and affection yogini amma had towards the original plaintiff (since deceased), she wished to gift some portion of the property to him and in pursuance thereof, ashramam represented by the then office bearers executed a settlement deed in respect of the properties. original plaintiff (since deceased) was the 13th signatory in the said settlement deed. there is a pathway provided in the settlement deed on the eastern extremity of the ashramam properties. there is yet another lane which comes along the western side of the ashramam property through which also the plaintiff has access to his property. it is incorrect to say that plaint `b' schedule is meant as a pathway for ingress and egress to `a' schedule property and that other than `b' schedule property there is no other means of direct or indirect access to `a' schedule property of the plaint. the further allegation that the pathway was granted by the said yogini amma to the original plaintiff (since deceased) and that he was using it from time immemorial was also not correct. originally, there was a narrow pathway which was widened to accommodate traffic to the ashramam. the present pathway came into existence only within the last 10 years. it can never be considered as an easement of necessity. original plaintiff (since deceased) has no easmentary right to use the gate and the pathway and he was not entitled to the declaration or injunction prayed for. therefore, the suit in the circumstances must be dismissed with costs to the defendants.
8. after the parties adduced evidence in support of their respective cases and after hearing the parties, the iind additional munsif, trivandrum decreed the suit for declaration of easement right and for injunction filed by the original plaintiff (since deceased), holding inter alia that :-
9. in these circumstances, it was clear that `b' schedule pathway was given to plaintiff as an easement of grant. defendants argued that no implied grant was pleaded in the plaint. however, it does not make a difference to the findings arrived at, as the plaintiff had pleaded easement of grant. the plaintiff's right to `b' schedule pathway does not affect the interest in the ashramam property in any manner. since this issue was found in favour of the plaintiff, the relief of declaration and injunction was granted as prayed for.
10. feeling aggrieved by the order of the iind additional munsif, the defendants preferred an appeal before the iiird additional district judge, thiruvananthapuram. the appellate court, by an order dated 6th of april, 1999, allowed the appeal partly. the issues framed by the appellate court were as follows:
11. the appellate court found that on evidence, it was proved that there is an alternate way on the western side of the `a' schedule property. the plaintiff, however, asserted that there is a difference in level of 14 feet between the `a' schedule property of the plaint and the property adjacent to it which is situated on the western side. however, the existence of an alternate pathway, howsoever inconvenient, will defeat the claim of easement of necessity. the necessity must be absolute and must be subsisting at the time when the plaintiff claims right of way by easement. in the light of these findings, the appellate court held that the claim of the plaintiff regarding the right of easement of necessity over the plaint `b' schedule pathway was not sustainable.
12. on the question of easement by grant, the appellate court was of the opinion that the plaintiff's claim in that respect stood proved. the plaintiff had acquaintance and association with the ashramam and yogini amma from his childhood days as revealed from the oral and documentary evidence. considering the location and nature of `b' schedule pathway, the location of two pillars at its inception and the gate from which it started, it could be seen that it had been in use by the plaintiff as a pathway. the plaintiff had been residing in the house on `a' schedule property even prior to the deed of settlement. therefore, the appellate authority arrived at the conclusion that the plaintiff had obtained right of easement of grant from yogini amma over the `b' schedule pathway. an easement of grant is a matter of contract between the parties and it may have its own consideration. (b.b. katiyar's commentaries on easements and licenses, p. 762). it may be either express or even by necessary implication. though easement of necessity will come to an end with the termination of necessity, easement acquired by grant cannot be extinguished on that ground as per section 13(b) of the
. therefore, even assuming that the plaintiff had an alternative pathway as contended by the defendants, it does not extinguish the right of easement of grant in favour of the plaintiff. therefore, the trial court was justified in granting a relief of declaration of right of easement of grant over the `b' schedule pathway. however, the declaration granted on the ground of easement of necessity was not justified.
13. it was further held that the apprehension of the plaintiff on attempted obstruction of the `b' schedule pathway was well-founded and, therefore, the trial court was justified in granting the relief of permanent injunction against the defendants.
14. aggrieved by the order of the first appellate court, the defendants took a second appeal before the high court of kerala. the high court, by its impugned judgment and order dated 9th of may, 2006, dismissed the appeal and affirmed the orders of the trial court and of the appellate court.
15. the issues that were raised for consideration of the high court were as follows:
16. the high court limited itself to the issue whether the decree of the first appellate court granting the original plaintiff (since deceased) right of easement over `b' schedule property by way of grant concurring with the findings of the trial court was sustainable.
17. before the high court, the defendants pleaded that there had been no appeal or cross objection filed by the original plaintiff (since deceased) against the order of the appellate court which disallowed the claim of easement of necessity and, therefore, the finding that there existed no easement of necessity in favour of the original plaintiff (since deceased) over the `b' schedule property stood confirmed. further they contended that the alternative pathway on the western side of the `a' schedule property was rendered inconvenient by the very act of the original plaintiff (since deceased) who sold that portion of the property to a third party who began digging that pathway resulting in the difference in level. the high court, on consideration of these contentions, held that though the claim of right of easement by way of necessity over `b' schedule property may be affected by the subsequent sale of the said plot by the plaintiff in 1983, the claim of right of easement by way of grant over `b' schedule property stood unaffected by the said conduct.
18. the very fact that the plaintiff was continuing to use the said pathway for access to `a' schedule property was an indication that there was implied grant of `b' schedule pathway of the plaint for access to the `a' schedule property even while `a' schedule property was separately allotted to him under settlement deed. such implied grant is inferable also on account of the acquiescence of the defendants in the original plaintiff (since deceased) using `b' schedule as pathway till it was for the first time objected on 21st of july, 1982 as alleged by the original plaintiff (since deceased).
21. the high court quoted with approval katiyar's note to section 8 of the
22. applying these observations to the facts of the case, the high court held that though the original grant was by yogini amma that grant could not perfect as an easement for the reason that yogini amma herself was the owner of both `a' schedule and `b' schedule properties and consequently there was no question of `b' schedule property becoming the servient tenement and `a' schedule property becoming the dominant tenement. however, it was the desire of yogini amma that was implemented by her disciples by virtue of the settlement deed. therefore, the right of the plaintiff to have `b' schedule property as a pathway could not have been taken away by the very same deed. in fact, there was implied grant of `b' schedule property as pathway as can be inferred from the circumstances, namely, i) no other pathway was provided for access to `a' schedule property in the settlement deed and ii) there was no objection to the use of `b' schedule as pathway.
