the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice altamas kabir
1. leave granted.
2. the election commission of india has filed this appeal against the judgment and order dated 30th june, 2010, passed by the division bench of the andhra pradesh high court in writ petition no.14443 of 2010 filed by the respondent, telangana rastra samithi, challenging the decision of the commission not to hold bye- elections to 28-vemulawada and 29-sircilla assembly constituencies in the state of andhra pradesh. the writ petition involving the holding of bye-elections to casual vacancies in the state legislative assembly, was allowed by the high court by its impugned judgment by applying the literal rule of interpretation. it was held that the provisions of section 151a of the
, hereinafter referred to as 'the 1951 act', were mandatory and that the pendency of election petitions and the uncertain consequences that might follow would not in any manner dilute the effect of section 151a, especially when the speaker of the assembly had already notified the vacancies as contemplated under article 190(3)(b) of the
read with section 150 of the aforesaid act and had directed the appellant herein to hold bye-elections for filling up the vacancies for the two aforesaid assembly constituencies along with bye-elections already notified for ten other assembly constituencies.
3. briefly stated, the facts indicate that in order to press for a separate telangana state, a joint action committee was formed with all political parties which took a decision that all the members of the legislative assembly of the respective political parties should resign. consequently, 12 members submitted their resignations from the membership of the andhra pradesh state legislative assembly to the speaker of the assembly on 14th february, 2010. on receipt of the said resignations, the speaker ordered that the resultant vacancies be notified. the said notification was duly published in the andhra pradesh gazette (part ii extraordinary) dated 14.02.2010. the election commission of india issued a press note dated 21.06.2010 under section 30 of the
, notifying its decision to hold bye-elections to fill up 10 clear vacancies according to the programme indicated therein. the bye-elections to 28- vemulawada and 29-sircilla assembly constituencies were not notified on account of the fact that election petitions were pending in which the petitioners had sought to be declared elected. accordingly, there being 10 clear vacancies in the state legislative assembly of andhra pradesh, the commission decided to hold bye-elections to fill up the 10 clear vacancies as per programme indicated. the decision of the election commission of india, hereinafter referred to as "the commission", not to hold bye- elections in the two aforesaid constituencies was challenged in the writ petition, which was ultimately allowed.
4. the question raised in the writ petition was whether section 151a read with sections 84, 98, 101 and 150 of the
, was mandatory or only directory. a question was also raised as to whether section 151a of the above act is subject to article 324 of the
. since section 151a of the
is the focal point of the case made out by the writ petitioners, the same is extracted hereinbelow :
5. the high court took the view that sections 147, 148, 149, 150, 151 and 151a of the
, the high court held that the said sections are enabling in nature, enabling an election petitioner to claim a declaration that the election of the returned candidate is void and for a further declaration that he or any other candidate had been duly elected. the high court recorded the submission made on behalf of the commission that if the bye- election to a constituency is not stayed and if a candidate who files an election petition eventually gets such a declaration, and if a bye- election is held consequent upon a resignation of a member, it could result in an impossible situation. on behalf of the commission it was also submitted that the provisions of sections 150 and 151 of the
should be construed harmoniously. the high court, however, rejected the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner and took the stand that in view of the non- obstante clause in section 151a, such harmonious construction was ruled out and that even otherwise, grant of additional relief of declaration that the election petitioner had been elected was not the rule.
, should be interpreted so as not to render sections 84, 98 and 101 otiose, was unsustainable. it was also held that a court should decide a case as per the law as on the existing date of adjudication. the high court, therefore, allowed the writ petition and directed elections be held in the two constituencies referred to hereinabove, since in its view ignoring the provisions of section 151a of the
would amount to violation of article 327 and valid law made by parliament.
