the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice dr. mukundakam sharma
1. leave granted.
2. the assessee (appellant herein) seeks to challenge the judgment of the high court of rajasthan at jodhpur in central excise appeal no.9 of 2006. by its judgment and order dated 26.8.2008, the high court dismissed the appeal, affirming the order of the tribunal dated 4.7.2005, which had allowed the appeal of the revenue and set aside the order of the commissioner (appeals), who in turn had set aside the order in original. by the order in original, the assistant commissioner had disallowed the modvat credit of ' 5,37,799, and confirmed the recovery thereof, and also imposed a penalty of ' 50, 000 under rule 173q(1)(bb) of the
(for short "
").
3. the necessary facts, in brief are, that the show cause notice dated 15.2.1999 was issued to the assessee alleging that it had wrongly taken credit to the extent of '5,37,799 under rule 57a of
, during august 1998. the notice also called upon the assessee to show cause and explain as to why the aforesaid credit, wrongly taken by the assessee should not be disallowed/recovered under provisions of rule 57-i, and also why penal action under rule 173q(1)(bb) should not be taken, and interest should not be charged under section 11ab.
4. the assessee is engaged in the manufacture of hdpe/pp fabrics and bags, and was clearing the goods for home consumption on payment of central excise duty, as well as exporting the goods under bond without payment of duty, and was availing modvat credit on the inputs under rule 57a. the revenue alleged that the assessee vide declarations in form ar4 dated 4.8.1998, 17.8.1998 and 22.8.1998 had exported certain quantity of fabrics in its own account, and in the said ar4s had declared that the assessee had manufactured the fabric as mentioned in ar4, and that the benefit of modvat under rule 57a has not been availed, and also that it had not availed the facilities under rule 12(1)(b) and 13(1)(b) of
, and that export was made in discharge of export obligation under "advance licence" file.
5. it was alleged by the revenue that the same was a false declaration, as the assessee has been availing modvat credit on the inputs under rule 57a. likewise, in column 4 of the form, the assessee had further declared that the export is under duty draw back, while on examination of central excise records and r.t.12 returns of the assessee, it was found that the assessee had taken modvat credit on the inputs used in the manufacture of exported goods, and they had not received any duty free consignment of pp granules (inputs) from anyone for exporting the goods on its behalf till the date of above-said exports, and that they had also not reversed any credit taken on the inputs used in the goods exported vide above referred ar4s. thus, the assessee, it was alleged, had wrongly taken credit of modvat, to the tune of ' 5,37,799, which was not admissible.
6. the assessing officer confirmed the demand, which was set aside in appeal, and was reconfirmed in further stages of appeal, as delineated above.
7. the high court dismissed the appeal, holding that the assessee had resorted to subterfuge and impermissible technicalities in attaining its desired end to claim the modvat credit. while the high court admitted that the assessee had not indeed claimed the modvat credit on the inputs at the date when form ar4s were submitted and the goods were exported, it was held by the hon'ble court that the said line of argument could not make a case in favour of the assessee. the high court arrived at this conclusion on a reading of the provisions enshrined in rule 57a, sub-rules (1) and (2), and on interpreting the declarations made under form ar4 in context of the case. the high court held:
based on this line of reasoning, the high court deemed it fit to dismiss the appeal preferred by the assessee. aggrieved by the decision of the high court the appellant-assessee has approached this court by way of this special leave to appeal, on which we have granted leave.
