the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice r. m. lodha
1. this appeal, by special leave, is directed against the judgment dated january 7, 2004 passed by the high court of punjab and haryana whereby the second appeal preferred by present respondents 1(i) to (vi) was allowed and the judgment and decree dated december 21, 1981 passed by the additional district judge (iii), kurukshetra was set aside and the judgment and decree dated august 31, 1981 passed by sub-judge, ist class, kaithal was restored.
2. soran, resident of village bandrana, tehsil kaithal, district kurushetra, haryana died intestate leaving two wives - nanhi and shingari, one son ram kala and three daughters chameli, panmehswari and boghri him surviving. soran's first wife was pratapi who pre-deceased him. ram kala was born out of that wedlock. chameli, panmeshwari and boghri are daughters of shingari from the loins of soran. prior to her marriage with soran, shingari was married to lachhman and a son man singh was born from her first marriage.
3. man singh (since deceased - now represented by his wife - hereinafter referred to as 'the appellant') filed a suit against his mother shingari on march 6, 1979 in the court of sub-judge, iind class, kaithal. the prayer was for 'a decree for declaration to the effect that the plaintiff is owner in possession of the land mentioned in para no. 1(a)(b) of the plaint in place of the defendant' based on the family settlement entered into between him and his mother on january 1, 1978. he averred that on the basis of the family settlement, he was given possession of the land mentioned in para 1 of the plaint and his mother agreed that she would get the revenue entries of the suit land corrected in his favour but those entries have not been corrected. he alleged that his mother was seeking to back out of the family settlement.
4. shingari filed written statement on march 9, 1979 and admitted appellant's claim in the suit. as there was no contest from shingari, the sub-judge, iind class, kaithal decreed appellant's suit as prayed on that day itself.
5. the appellant, as noted above, was shingari's son born of her first marriage with lachhman and he had no claim in the property left by soran. the claim made by the appellant against his mother was founded on the basis that his mother had acquired 1/5th share in the property after the death of soran. having come to know of the decree passed in favour of the appellant, ram kala (since deceased - now represented by his legal heirs - hereinafter referred to as the 'first respondent') instituted a suit against appellant and shingari praying therein that the decree dated march 9, 1979 be declared null and void and the appellant be restrained from interfering with the possession of the first respondent in respect of the said land. the first respondent set up the case that the property of soran has devolved on his heirs according to the
and shingari inherited 1/10th share in the property left by his father and she had no right to alienate the suit land in favour of the appellant.
6. the appellant traversed the averments made by the first respondent and set up diverse pleas justifying the decree dated march 9, 1979.
7. on the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the trial court framed as many as nine issues and after recording the evidence, decreed the suit filed by the first respondent on august 31, 1981 and held that the decree dated march 9, 1979 was null and void and not binding on the first respondent.
8. as against the decree passed by the sub-judge, ist class, kaithal, the appellant preferred civil first appeal which was heard by additional district judge (iii), kurukshetra. the additional district judge partly allowed the appeal; modified the decree passed by the sub-judge ist class, kaithal on august 31, 1981 by holding that the findings recorded by the trial court on issue nos. 5 and 6 were wrong but maintained that the decree dated march 9, 1979 would not affect the rights of the first respondent.
9. the first respondent challenged the decree passed by the additional district judge (iii) in the second appeal before the high court. during the pendency of the second appeal the appellant as well as first respondent died and their legal representatives were brought on record. in the opinion of the high court, the only substantial question of law for consideration in second appeal was, whether there could be any estoppel against the statute. the high court while dealing with the said question held as under :
10. it is pertinent to notice here that insofar as the decree dated march 9, 1979 is concerned, all the three courts have concurrently held that the said decree was not binding on the first respondent, although reasons recorded for that conclusion were different. the trial court recorded the following reasons in this regard:
11. the first appellate court did not agree with the trial court's finding as regards shingari's share in the properties left by soran and held as under:
12. we have already noticed the view of the high court above. in our opinion, the conclusion arrived at by the three courts that the decree dated march 9, 1979 was not binding on the first respondent is right and proper and calls for no interference. however, we maintain the conclusion not for the reasons given by the high court or the two courts below but for the reasons which we indicate hereinafter. pertinently, in the earlier suit filed by the appellant against his mother in which the decree dated march 9, 1979 was passed, it was not even the case of the appellant or his mother shingari that shares among heirs of soran were determined by agreement or otherwise. till disruption of joint family status takes place, neither coparcener nor the other heirs entitled to share in the joint family property can claim with certainty the exact share in that property. in the case of appovier alias seetaramier v. rama subba aiyan & ors., (1866) 11 mia 75
13. in a. raghavamma and anr. v. a. chenchamma and anr., air 1964 sc 136
in paragraph 20 of the report, this court stated thus :
16. section 6 of the
18.
19. for the foregoing reasons, we confirm the judgment of the high court to the extent it has been held therein that the decree dated march 9, 1979 is not binding on the first respondent. however, the determination of shares among the heirs of soran by the high court cannot be sustained and we set aside the same. the appeal is disposed of accordingly. it will be open to the heirs of soran to prosecute appropriate remedy for determination of their respective shares and claim partition in accordance with law, if so advised. the parties shall bear their own costs.
