the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice s. h. kapadia
leave granted.
. it is under the control of department of atomic energy, government of india. a dispute had been raised by the central government (ministry of finance) by issuing show cause notices to the assessee alleging that the corporation was not entitled to avail/utilize modvat/cenvat credit in respect of inputs whose values stood written off. accordingly it was proposed in the show cause notices that the credit taken on inputs was liable to be reversed. thus, the short point which arose for determination in the present case was whether the central government was right in insisting on reversal of credit taken by the assessee on inputs whose values stood written off.
3. the adjudicating authority held that there was no substance in the contention of the assessee that the write off was made in terms of as-2. the case of the assessee before the commissioner of central excise (adjudicating authority) was that it was a financial requirement as prescribed in as-2; that an inventory more than three years old had to be written off/derated in value; that such derating in value did not mean that the inputs were unfunctionable; that the inputs were still lying in the factory and they were useful for production and therefore they were entitled to modvat/cenvat credit. as stated above, this argument was rejected by the adjudicating authority and the demand against the assessee stood confirmed. against the order of the adjudicating authority, the assessee decided to challenge the same by filing an appeal before cestat. accordingly, the assessee applied before the committee on disputes (cod). however, the cod vide its decision dated 2.11.2006 refused to grant clearance though in an identical case the cod granted clearance to bharat heavy electricals ltd. ("bhel"). accordingly, the assessee herein filed writ petition no. 26573 of 2008 in the andhra pradesh high court. by the impugned decision, the writ petition filed by the assessee stood dismissed. against the order of the andhra pradesh high court the assessee has moved this court by way of a special leave petition.
4. in a conjunct matter, civil appeal no. 1903 of 2008, the facts were as follows. bharat petroleum corporation ltd. ("assessee" for short) cleared the goods for sale at the outlets owned and operated by themselves known as company owned and company operated outlets. the assessee cleared the goods for sale at such outlets by determining the value of the goods cleared during the period february, 2000 to november, 2001 on the basis of the price at which such goods were sold from their warehouses to independent dealers, instead of determining it on the basis of the normal price and normal transaction value as per section 4(4)(b)(iii) of
("
. in short, the price adopted by the assessee which is a psu in terms of administered pricing mechanism ("apm") formulated by government of india stood rejected. the tribunal came to the conclusion that the apm adopted by the assessee was in terms of the price fixed by the ministry of petroleum and natural gas; that it was not possible for the assessee to adopt the price in terms of section 4(1)(a) of the
; and that it was not possible to arrive at the transaction value in terms of the said section. accordingly, the tribunal allowed the appeal of the assessee. aggrieved by the decision of the tribunal, cce has come to this court by way of civil appeal no. 1903 of 2008 in which the assessee has preferred i.a. no. 4 of 2009 requesting the court to dismiss the above civil appeal no. 1903 of 2008 filed by the department on the ground that cod has declined permission to the department to pursue the said appeal.
5. the above two instances are given only to highlight the fact that the mechanism set up by this court in its orders reported in (i) 1995 suppl.(4) scc 541 (ongc v. cce
6. learned attorney general has submitted that the above orders have outlived their utility and in view of the changed scenario, as indicated hereinafter, the aforestated orders are required to be recalled. we find merit in the submission made by the attorney general of india on behalf of the union of india for the following reasons. by order dated 11.9.1991, reported in 1992 supp (2) scc 432 (ongc and anr. v. cce
7. this was followed by the order dated 11.10.1991 in ongc-ii case
8. thereafter, in ongc-iii case
9.
