the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice h. l. dattu
1. this appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 21.06.2002, passed by the division bench of the high court of judicature of andhra pradesh at hyderabad in tax revision case no. 54 of 1991. by the impugned judgment and order, the high court has dismissed the revision petition filed by the assessee, inter-alia, holding that the disputed transactions constitute inter- state sales, as contemplated under section 3(a) of the
.
2. the issue that we are called upon to decide in the case is, whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the sale or purchase of goods can be said to have taken place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce and thereby exigible to tax under the
(hereinafter referred to as, "
").
as well as
.
5. m/s. usha sales ltd. (subsequently known as usha international ltd.) (hereinafter referred to as "uil") is a company registered under the
with its registered office at 19, kasturba gandhi marg, new delhi. it has 16 divisional offices at various places in the country with different names at every place wherever the assessee's godowns are located. the assessee and uil had entered into a sales agreement dated 01.05.1979. it was for a period of five years. under the said agreement, the main function of uil was to organize the sale and distribution of the products of the assessee and to arrange for sale promotion measures of the products and to provide after sales service and such other services as might be required in the interest of sale of the said products. the agreement also envisaged that uil would purchase the said products as an independent principal and maintain adequate stocks and sell the same as such. we will refer to these clauses in the agreement while discussing the issues raised by the learned counsel for the parties at the time of hearing of the appeal.
6. the company has been an assessee on the rolls of the commercial tax officer, company circle-ii, nampalli, hyderabad. for the assessment year 1981-82, the assessee company filed its annual returns under
in the prescribed form.
7. the assessee company claimed exemption on a turnover of '8,87,75,643.00 towards goods transported to out-of-state depots otherwise than as a result of direct sale which would attract tax under section 6 of
.
8. the assessee's case before the assessing authority, sales tax appellate tribunal and the high court was that the transactions on which exemptions claimed cannot be regarded as sales in the course of inter-state trade, chargeable to tax under
9. the findings of the assessing authority with respect to the nature of the transactions with its various branches, except in the case of calcutta depot, may be set out in his own words :-
, for the issue involved in the case is legal.
