the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice dr. mukundakam sharma
1. leave granted.
2. the present appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 03.07.2009 in civil writ petition no. 13860 of 2007 passed by the punjab & haryana high court, whereby the high court while interfering with the order of the settlement commission regarding payment of interest on the cenvat credit, has held that the appellants herein have wrongly claimed interest on the cenvat credit, from the date when such credit was wrongly availed instead of the date when such credit was actually utilized. the high court has further held that the appellants are not entitled to claim interest on the amount of rs. 50 lacs up to 31.01.2007 as the said amount already stood deposited on 08.03.2006.
. the company received inputs and capital goods from various manufacturers / dealers and availed cenvat credit on the duty paid on such materials. on the basis of intelligence report, the factory premises of the respondent as also its group companies at different places were searched on 08.03.2006. searches were also conducted at the offices of large number of firms in ghaziabad and noida which had allegedly issued invoices without any accompanying goods to the respondent and its group companies. at the same time the residential premises of mr. r.p. jain and mr. j.p. singh, the brokers, were also searched and particularly during the course of search of the residence of mr. r.p. jain kachha ledgers / notebooks / files and cheques issued by the swift group to the parties from whom invoices without material were being received, were recovered. it also appears that the appellant conducted investigations which indicated that the respondent had taken cenvat credit on fake invoices. consequently, a show cause notice dated 08.12.2006 was issued to the respondent, to which a reply was also submitted by the respondent. the respondent company also filed applications for settlement of the proceedings and consequently the entire matter was placed before the settlement commission.
4. before the settlement commission, it was an admitted position that the case pertained to the period from 27.10.2001 to 31.03.2006. the respondent company also admitted all the allegations and duty liability as per the show cause notice dated 08.12.2006. the respondent also deposited the entire duty of rs. 5,71,47,148/-. since conditions/parameters for the admission of a case prescribed under section 32e(1) of the
[for short "
"] were fulfilled and complied with, the application of the respondent for settlement was entertained and the same was proceeded with in terms of section 32f(1) of
. after considering the records and hearing the parties the commission came to the findings that while the wrongful cenvat credit was taken from the year 2001 to 31.03.2006, the payments refunds have been made on 22.02.2006 and on five different dates in march, 2006 and on 20.11.2006 and, therefore, the respondent had the benefit of availing the large amount of cenvat credit to which they were not entitled. considering the said fact, the commission felt and was of the view that the appropriate interest liability has to be borne by the respondent on such wrongful availment of cenvat credit. accordingly, the applications of the respondent were settled under section 32f(7) of
subject to the following terms and conditions: -
5. the said order also specifically recorded that full immunity be granted to the respondent from penalty and prosecution. subsequent to the passing of the said order, the respondent herein filed a miscellaneous application seeking for clarification contending inter alia that the respondent had deposited whole amount of duty during investigation without protest and that, following the final order, the revenue has calculated interest liability of the respondent at rs. 1,47,90,065/- and that the revenue has calculated the said interest up to the date of the appropriation of the deposited amount and not up to the date of payment. it was further contended that the interest has to be calculated from the date of actual utilization and not from the date of availment. consequently, it was prayed in the said application that the settlement commission may clarify the actual amount of interest liability of the respondent and extend the period of payment of interest in the interest of justice and equity.
6. the said application was taken up for consideration and after hearing the parties the application was dismissed. while rejecting the said application the bench noted that the final order sets out in very clear terms that the respondent shall pay simple interest @ 10 per cent per annum on cenvat credit wrongfully availed from the date the duty became payable as per section 11ab of
, till the date of payment and that the application is misconceived and that no case of any clarification is made out because interest has to be calculated till the date of the payment of the duty. it was also held that the interest is also payable with reference to the date of availment of cenvat credit and not from the date of utilization of a part of the balance of such credit. the commission held that such an issue was never raised before the settlement commission at any earlier stage. the commission while rejecting the application held as follows: -
7. the respondent, however, did not pay the entire amount in terms of the liability fixed. consequently, a letter was issued on 16.08.2007 from the office of the appellant directing the appellant to pay the balance amount in terms of the order dated 19.01.2007.
8. the records disclose that immediately on receipt of the aforesaid letter the respondent filed a writ petition in the high court of punjab & haryana which was registered as civil writ petition no. 13860 of 2007, praying for quashing the order dated 31.05.2007 which was passed by the settlement commission on the applications seeking clarifications and the letter dated 16.08.2007 by which the office of the appellant requested the respondent to deposit the balance amount in terms of the order dated 19.01.2007.
9. the high court issued notice and heard the parties on the said writ petition. by its judgment and order dated 03.07.2009 the said writ petition was allowed by the high court holding that rule 14 of the
[for short "
"] has to be read down to mean that where cenvat credit has been taken and/or utilized wrongly, interest should be payable on the cenvat credit from the date the said credit had been utilized wrongly and that interest cannot be claimed simply for the reason that the cenvat credit has been wrongly taken, as such availment by itself does not create any liability of payment of excise duty. the high court further held that on a conjoint reading of section 11ab of
and that of rules 3 & 4 of the
, interest cannot be claimed from the date of wrong availment of cenvat credit and that the interest would be payable from the date cenvat credit was wrongfully utilized.
10. being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order passed by the high court the present appeal was filed by the appellant, which was entertained and notice was issued to the respondent, on receipt of which, they have entered appearance. counsel appearing for the parties were heard at length when the matter was listed for final arguments. by the present judgment and order we now proceed to dispose the said appeal by recording our reasons.
11. the facts delineated hereinabove make it crystal clear that the respondent accepted all the allegations raised in the show cause notice and also the duty liability under the said show cause notice dated 08.12.2006. they also deposited the entire duty of rs. 5,71,47,148/- prior to the issuance of the show cause notice and, therefore, they requested for settlement of the proceedings in terms of section 32e read with section 32f of
. the said settlement proceedings were conducted in accordance with law and was finalized by the order dated 19.01.2007 on the terms and conditions which have already been extracted hereinbefore.
12.
13. the order of the settlement commission also indicates that full immunities were granted to the respondent from penalty and prosecution. the aforesaid order was not challenged by the respondent in any forum and, therefore, it became final and conclusive in terms of section 32m of
, which states that every order of settlement passed under sub- section 7 of section 32f would be conclusive as to the matters stated therein subject to the condition that when a settlement order is obtained by fraud or misrepresentation of fact, such an order would be void. according to the said provisions, no matter covered by such order could be reopened in any proceeding under the
14. although, subsequently, an application by way of clarification was filed by the respondent, the said application was, however, not entertained. it was held that the said application is misconceived, particularly, in view of the fact that no such issue was raised before the commission. since, however, a writ petition was filed by the respondent challenging only the second order of the settlement commission and the subsequent letter issued from the office of the appellant, on the basis of which, high court even proceeded to interfere with the first order passed by the settlement commission, we heard the counsel appearing for the parties on the issue decided by the high court also.
16. a bare reading of the said rule would indicate that the manufacturer or the provider of the output service becomes liable to pay interest along with the duty where cenvat credit has been taken or utilized wrongly or has been erroneously refunded and that in the case of the aforesaid nature the provision of section 11ab would apply for effecting such recovery.
17.
