the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice b. sudershan reddy
4. juxtaposing the two divergent views outlined above, we have framed the following questions:
ii
meanings of some phrases and expressions used hereinafter:
aspects or causes that occur, arise, or exist, or may be expected to do so, outside the territory of india.
iii
factual background as to how the matter arose before us.
7. the appellant by way of a writ petition filed in andhra pradesh high court had challenged an order of the respondents which decided that the appellant was liable to withhold a certain portion of monies being paid to a foreign company, under either one of sections 9(1)(i) or 9(1)(vii)(b) of the
(1961). the appellant had also challenged the vires of section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the
for want of legislative competence and violation of article 14 of the
. the high court having upheld that section 9(1)(i) did not apply in the circumstances of the facts of the case, nevertheless upheld the applicability of section 9(1)(vii)(b) on the facts and also upheld the constitutional validity of the said provision. the high court mainly relied on the ratio of the judgment by a three judge bench of this court in ecil. hence, the appeal.
8. the matter came up for consideration before a two judge bench of this court. in light of the far reaching issues of great constitutional purport raised in this matter, the fact that such issues had been raised previously in ecil, the referencing of some of those issues by the three judge bench in ecil to a constitutional bench, and the fact that the civil appeals in the ecil case had also been withdrawn, a two judge bench of this court vide its order dated november 28, 2000, also referred the instant matter to a constitutional bench. on july 13, 2010, the matter again came up for consideration before another three judge bench of this court, and vide its order of the same date, this matter came to be placed before us.
9. it is necessary for purposes of clarity that a brief recounting be undertaken at this stage itself as to what was conclusively decided in ecil, and what was referred to a constitutional bench. after conclusively determining that clauses (1) and (2) of article 245, read together, impose a requirement that the laws made by the parliament should bear a nexus with india, the three judge bench in ecil asked that a constitutional bench be constituted to consider whether the ingredients of the impugned provision, i.e., section 9(1) (vii) of the
indicate such a nexus. in the proceedings before us, the appellant withdrew its challenge of the constitutional validity of section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the
, and elected to proceed only on the factual matrix as to the applicability of the said section. nevertheless, the learned attorney general appearing for the respondent pressed upon this constitutional bench to reconsider the decision of the three judge bench in the ecil case. in light of the constitutional importance of the issues we agreed to consider the validity of the requirement of a relationship to or nexus with the territory of india as a limitation on the powers of the parliament to enact laws pursuant to clause (1) of article 245 of the
.
10. a further clarification needs to be made before we proceed. the issue of whether laws that deal entirely with aspects or causes that occur, arise or exist, or may be expected to do so, within india, and yet require to be operated outside the territory of india could be invalidated on the grounds of such extra-territorial operation is not before us. the text of clause (2) of article 245, when read together with clause (1) of article 245 makes it sufficiently clear that the laws made by the parliament relating to aspects or causes that occur, arise or exist or may be expected to occur, arise or come into existence within the territory of india may not be invalidated on the ground that such laws require to be operated outside the territory of india. we will of course deal with this aspect to the extent that it is required for a proper appreciation of clause (1) of article 245, and to the extent the permissibility of such extra-territorial operation has been sought to be, by the learned attorney general, extrapolated into a power to make any extra-territorial laws.
iv
the ratio in ecil:
11. the requirement of a nexus with the territory of india was first explicitly articulated in the decision by a three judge bench of this court in ecil. the implication of the nexus requirement is that a law that is enacted by the parliament, whose "objects" or "provocations" do not arise within the territory of india, would be unconstitutional. the words "object" and "provocation", and their plural forms, may be conceived as having been used in ecil as synonyms for the words "aspect" and "cause", and their plural forms, as used in this judgment.
12. the issue under consideration in ecil was whether section 9(1)(vii)(b) of the
was unconstitutional on the ground that it constitutes a law with respect to objects or provocations outside the territory of india, thereby being ultra-vires the powers granted by clause (1) of article 245. interpreting clauses (1) and (2) of article 245, chief justice pathak (as he then was) drew a distinction between the phrases "make laws" and "extraterritorial operation" - i.e., the acts and functions of making laws versus the acts and functions of effectuating a law already made.
13. in drawing the distinction as described above, the decision in ecil considered two analytically separable, albeit related, issues. they relate to the potential conflict between the fact that, in the international context, the "principle of sovereignty of states" (i.e., nation-states) would normally be "that the laws made by one state can have no operation in another state" (i.e., they may not be enforceable), and the prohibition in clause (2) of article 245 that laws made by the parliament may not be invalidated on the ground that they may need to be or are being operated extra-territorially.
14. the above is of course a well recognized problem that has been grappled with by courts across many jurisdictions in the world; and in fact, many of the cases cited by the learned attorney general attest to the same. relying on the ratio of british columbia railway company limited v. king, [1946] a.c. 527
15. however, the principle enunciated above does not address the question as to whether the parliament may enact a law "for" a territory outside the boundaries of india. to enact laws "for" a foreign territory could be conceived of in two forms. the first form would be, where the laws so enacted, would deal with or be in respect of extra-territorial aspects or causes, and the laws would seek to control, modulate or transform or in some manner direct the executive of the legislating state to act upon such extra- territorial aspects or causes because: (a) such extra-territorial aspects or causes have some impact on or nexus with or to india; and (b) such laws are intended to benefit india. the second form would be when the extra-territorial aspects do not have, and neither are expected to have, any nexus whatsoever with india, and the purpose of such legislation would serve no purpose or goal that would be beneficial to india.
supra note 1. (emphasis added).
v
the propositions of the learned attorney general:
20. in attacking such a construction, the learned attorney general appeared to have moved to another extreme. the written propositions of the learned attorney general, with respect to the meaning, purport and ambit of article 245, quoted verbatim, were the following:
21. in as much as the issues with regard to operation of laws enacted by the various state legislatures are not before us, we decline to express our opinion with respect to historical antecedents of nexus theory in the context of division of powers between a federation and the federal provinces. given the fact that the learned attorney general has not further refined or explicated the propositions as set forth above, we are compelled to assume that he intended us to take it that the parliament should be deemed to have the powers and competence as set forth below, which arise out of a rigorous analysis of his propositions, and consequently examine them in light of the text of article 245.
24. in addition the learned attorney general has also placed reliance on the fact that the clause 179 of the draft constitution, was split up into two separate clauses, clause 179(1) and clause 179(2), by the constitution drafting committee, and adopted as clauses (1) and (2) of article 245 in the constitution. it seemed to us that the learned attorney general was seeking to draw two inferences from this. the first one seemed to be that the drafting committee intended clause 179(2), and hence clause (2) of article 245, to be an independent, and a separate, source of legislative powers to the parliament to make "extra-territorial laws". the second inference that we have been asked to make is that in as much as parliament has been explicitly permitted to make laws having "extra-territorial operation", parliament should be deemed to possess powers to make "extra-territorial laws", the implications of which have been more particularly explicated above. the learned attorney general relied on the following case law in support his propositions and arguments: ashbury v. ellis [1893] a.c. 339
may have been transgressed. hence clarity is necessary with respect to the extent of powers granted and the limits on them, so that the organs of the state charged with the working of the mandate of the
can proceed with some degree of certitude.
(see: reflections on free- form method in constitutional interpretation) 108 harv. l. rev. 1221, 1235 (1995).
29. it has been repeatedly appreciated by this court that our constitution is one of the most carefully drafted ones, where every situation conceivable, within the vast experience, expertise and knowledge of our framers, was considered, deliberated upon, and appropriate features and text chosen to enable the organs of the state in discharging their roles. while indeed dynamic interpretation is necessary, if the meaning necessary to fit the changed circumstances could be found in the text itself, we would always be better served by treading a path as close as possible to the text, by gathering the plain ordinary meaning, and by sweeping our vision and comprehension across the entire document to see whether that meaning is validated by constitutional values and scheme.
vii textual analysis of article 245:
(see: concise oxford english dictionary) 8th ed., oup (oxford, 1990).
35. the above understanding comports with the contemporary understanding, that emerged in the 20th century, after hundreds of years of struggle of humanity in general, and nearly a century long struggle for freedom in india, that the state is charged with the responsibility to always act in the interest of the people at large. in as much as many extra-territorial aspects or causes may have an impact on or nexus with the nation-state, they would legitimately, and indeed necessarily, be within the domain of legislative competence of the national parliament, so long as the purpose or object of such legislation is to benefit the people of that nation state.
38. the notion that a nation-state, including its organs of governance such as the national legislature, must be concerned only with respect to persons, property, things, phenomenon, acts or events within its own territory emerged in the context of development of nation-states in an era when external aspects and causes were thought to be only of marginal significance, if at all. this also relates to early versions of sovereignty that emerged along with early forms of nation-states, in which internal sovereignty was conceived of as being absolute and vested in one or some organs of governance, and external sovereignty was conceived of in terms of co-equal status and absolute non- interference with respect to aspects or causes that occur, arise or exist, or may be expected to do so, in other territories. oppenheim's international law vol 1, "peace" 9th ed., page 125, 9 (longman group, uk, 1992). states as follows:
39. on account of scientific and technological developments the magnitude of cross border travel and transactions has increased tremendously. moreover, existence of economic, business, social and political organizations and forms, of more or less determinate structure, and both recognized and unrecognized, that operate across borders, implies that their activities, even though conducted in one territory may have an impact on or in another territory. externalities arising from economic activities, including but not limited to large scale exploitation of natural resources, and consequent pressure on delicate global environmental balance, are being recognized to be global in scope and impact. global criminal and terror networks are also examples of how events and activities in a territory outside one's own borders could affect the interests, welfare, well-being and security within. many other examples could also be adduced. for instance, the enablement, by law, of participation of the state in many joint, multilateral or bilateral efforts at coordination of economic, fiscal, monetary, trade, social, law enforcement activities, reduction of carbon emissions, prevention or mitigation of war in another region or maintenance of peace and security, etc., may be cited as additional examples of such inter-territorial dependence.
40. within international law, the principles of strict territorial jurisdiction have been relaxed, in light of greater interdependencies, and acknowledgement of the necessity of taking cognizance and acting upon extra-territorial aspects or causes, by principles such as subjective territorial principle, objective territorial principle, the effects doctrine that the united states uses, active personality principle, protective principle etc. however, one singular aspect of territoriality remains, and it was best stated by justice h.v. evatt: "the extent of extra-territorial jurisdiction permitted, or rather not forbidden, by international law cannot always be stated with precision. but certainly no state attempts to exercise jurisdiction over matters, persons, or things with which it has absolutely no concern." (see trustees executors & agency co ltd v. federal commissioner of taxation (1933) 49 c.l.r. 220
42. a question still remains, in light of the extreme conclusions that may arise on account of the propositions made by the learned attorney general. is the parliament empowered to enact laws in respect of extra-territorial aspects or causes that have no nexus with india, and furthermore could such laws be bereft of any benefit to india? the answer would have to be no.
it is to be taken, as a matter of initial assessment, as nothing more was intended. in this case it is the territory of india that is specified by the phrase "for the whole or any part of the territory of india." "expression unius est exclusio alterius"- the express mention of one thing implies the exclusion of another. in this case parliament has been granted powers to make laws "for" a specific territory - and that is india or any part thereof; by implication, one may not read that the parliament has been granted powers to make laws "for" territories beyond india.
55. the reliance placed by the learned attorney general on the history of changes to the pre-cursors of article 245, in the draft constitution, in support of his propositions is also inapposite. in fact one can clearly discern that the history of changes, to clause 179 of the draft constitution (which became article 245 in our constitution), supports the conclusions we have arrived at as to the meaning, purport and ambit of article 245. the first iteration of clause 179 of the draft constitution read, in part, as follows: "subject to the provisions of this constitution, the federal parliament may make laws, including laws having extra-territorial operation, for the whole or any part of the territories of the federation......" clearly the foregoing iteration shows that what was under consideration were the entire class of laws that the parliament was to be empowered to make "for the whole or any part of the territories of the federation.....", and included within that class were the laws "having extra-territorial operation." subsequently clause 179 of the draft constitution was split into two separate clauses 179 (1) and 179(2). the learned attorney general's arguments suggest that the conversion of draft clause 179 into two separate draft clauses, 179(1) and 179(2), should be interpreted to mean that the framers of the constitution  intended the two clauses to have a separate existence, independent of each other. we are not persuaded. the retention of the phrase "extra- territorial operation" as opposed to the phrase "extra-territorial laws" implies that the drafters were acutely aware of the difference between the meaning of the phrase "operation of law" and the "making of law". further, by beginning clause (2) of article 245 with the phrase "no law made by the parliament...", it is clear that the drafting committee intended to retain the link with clause (1) of article 245. (see: the framing of india's constitution, by the project committee, chairman b. shiva rao) vol. 3, universal law publishing co. thus we cannot view clause (2) of article 245 as an independent source of legislative powers on account of the history of various iterations of the pre-cursor to article 245 in the constituent assembly.
viii
analysis of constitutional topological space: chapter 1, part xi:
56. we now turn to chapter 1 part xi, in which article 245 is located, to examine other provisions that may be expected to transform or be transformed by the meaning of article 245 that we have discerned and explained above. in particular, the search is also for any support that may exist for the propositions of the learned attorney general that the parliament may make laws for any territory outside india.
58. article 248 provides for the residuary power of legislation. however, in this instance, the constitution speaks of the powers of parliament in terms of the subject matters or fields of legislative competence not enumerated in concurrent and state lists in the seventh schedule, etc. article 248 does not mention any specific territory. nevertheless, in as much as it retains the link to article 246, it can only be deemed that the original condition that all legislation be "for" the whole or some territory of india has been retained.
59. it would be pertinent to note, at this stage that list i -union list of the seventh schedule clearly lists out many matters that could be deemed to implicate aspects or causes that arise beyond the territory of india. in particular, but not limited to, note may be made of entries 9 through 21 thereof. combining the fact that the parliament has been granted residuary legislative powers and competence with respect to matters that are not enumerated in concurrent and state lists, vide article 248, the fact that parliament has been granted legislative powers and competence over various matters, as listed in list i of the seventh schedule, many of which may clearly be seen to be falling in the class of extra-territorial aspects or causes, vide article 246, and the powers to make laws "for the whole or any part of the territory of india", vide article 245, we must conclude that, contrary to the rigid reading of the ratio in ecil, parliament's legislative powers and competence with respect to extra-territorial aspects or causes that have a nexus with india was considered and provided for by the framers
ix
wider structural analysis:
x
relevance of case law cited by the learned attorney general:
. in emmanuel mortenssen supra note 6, the court of justiciary upheld the jurisdiction of the local sheriff with respect to the owners and operator of a trawler boat used for fishing inside the estuary. however, jurisdiction was not extended on the basis of parliamentary supremacy or of powers to enact extra-territorial laws. rather, the principle enunciated was that an estuary, under international law, falls within the territory of scotland, and that the north sea fisheries convention of 1883 did not derogate from the foregoing general principle of international law. consequently in as much as the operator or owner of that fishing trawler engaged in acts that were prohibited within the territorial limits over which the legislature that enacted the applicable statute had jurisdiction, the local sheriff exercised proper jurisdiction. croft v. dunphy supra note 7 was with regard to domestic laws operating beyond the territorial limits, and it was recognized that a law which protects the revenue of the states may necessarily have to be operated outside the territorial limits, but that such operation does not violate the principle that legislatures enact laws with respect to aspects or causes that have a nexus with the territory for which the legislature has the law making responsibility for. the control of smuggling activities and revenue collection were seen necessarily as related to the territorial interests, and it was in furtherance of such territorial interests, was extra-territorial operation permissible. in state v. narayandas
xi
conclusion:
70. the modern concept of sovereignty emerged in a troubled era of civil wars within the territories of, and incessant conflict between, nation-states. at one end of the spectrum political philosophers such as thomas hobbes and jean bodin postulated the necessity of absolute power within the territory, arguing that failure of order was inimical to the well being of the people, and further arguing that if the governments were to not have such absolute powers invariably leads to internal disorder. while it is generally and uncritically argued that hobbes and bodin stood for blind political absolutism, when viewed from a historical perspective, they can also be seen as the starting points of human beings quest for greater accountability of states and governments, which were to be increasingly viewed as the repositories of collective powers of the people. hobbes specifically recognized that governments would become unstable and lose their legitimacy if they failed to protect the welfare of the subjects. for bodin, the absolute sovereign was tempered by divine law (or "natural law"), and the customary laws of the community. alan james states that "[f]rom this basis it could be argued that sovereignty lay not with the ruler but with the ruled. in this way the ultimate authority could be claimed for the people, with the government simply acting as their agent." (see: sovereign statehood - the basis of international society allen & unwin, london (1986).). these seeds of accountability, carried within them the incipient forms of arguments that would inexorably lead to the modern notion of self-determination by the people: that each nation state, formed by the people, and answerable to the people through the organs of the state, would act in accordance with the wishes of the people - both in terms of ordinary moments of polity, and also in terms of constitutional moments, with the latter setting forth, in greater or lesser specificity, the acts that may or may not be done by the organs of the state.
71. the path to modern constitutionalism, with notions of divided and checked powers, fundamental rights and affirmative duties of the state to protect and enhance the interests of, welfare of, and security of the people, and a realization that "comity amongst nations" and international peace were sine qua non for the welfare of the people was neither straight forward, nor inevitable. it took much suffering, bloodshed, toil, tears and exploitation of the people by their own governments and by foreign governments, both in times of peace and in times of war, before humanity began to arrive at the conclusion that unchecked power would sooner, rather than later, turn tyrannical against the very people who have granted such power, and also harmful to the peaceful existence of other people in other territories. imperial expansion, as a result of thirst for markets and resources that the underlying economy demanded, with colonial exploitation as the inevitable result of that competition, and two horrific world wars are but some of the more prominent markers along that pathway. the most tendentious use of the word sovereignty, wherein the principles of self-determination were accepted within a nation- state but not deemed to be available to others, was the rhetorical question raised by adolf hitler at the time of annexation of austria in 1938: "what can words like 'independence' or 'sovereignty' mean for a state of only six million?" de smith, stanley a.: "microstates and micronesia" (new york, nyu press 1970), p. 19. we must recognize the fact that history is replete with instances of sovereigns who, while exercising authority on behalf of even those people who claimed to be masters of their own realm, contradictorily claimed the authority to exercise suzerain rights over another territory, its people and its resources, inviting ultimately the ruin of large swaths of humanity and also the very people such sovereigns, whether a despot or a representative organ, claimed to represent.
73. in granting the parliament the powers to legislate "for" india, and consequently also with respect to extra-territorial aspects or causes, the framers of our constitution certainly intended that there be limits as to the manner in which, and the extent to which, the organs of the state, including the parliament, may take cognizance of extra-territorial aspects or causes, and exert the state powers (which are the powers of the collective) on such aspects or causes. obviously, some of those limits were expected to work at the level of ideas and of morals, which can be inculcated by a proper appreciation of our own history, and the ideas of the framers of our constitution. they were also intended to have a legal effect. the working of the principles of public trust, the requirement that all legislation by the parliament with respect to extra-territorial aspects or causes be imbued with the purpose of protecting the interests of, the welfare of and the security of india, along with article 51, a directive principle of state policy, though not enforceable in a court of law, nevertheless fundamental to governance, lends unambiguous support to the conclusion that parliament may not enact laws with respect to extra-territorial aspects or causes, wherein such aspects or causes have no nexus whatsoever with india.
77. let the appeal be listed before an appropriate bench for disposal. ordered accordingly.
