the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice d. k. jain
1. leave granted.
2. this batch of appeals, by grant of leave, arises out of judgments and orders dated 9th april 2009, 22nd june 2009, 17th july 2009 and 18th september 2009 respectively passed by the gauhati high court at guwahati. by the impugned judgments, the high court has held that the
(for short "
(for short "
") and the regulations framed thereunder.
the national council for teacher education (for short "the ncte") was set up in the year 1973 by a government resolution as a national ex-pert body to advise the central and state governments on all matters pertaining to teacher education. since the role assigned to the ncte was purely advisory in nature, it had very little impact on the standards of teacher training institutions in the country and on their unplanned growth. therefore, in order to empower the ncte to make qualitative improvements in the system of teacher training, in the year 1993,
was enacted by the parliament giving statutory recognition to the ncte. it is manifest from the pre- amble to
that it had been enacted with a view to achieving planned and coordinated development; and proper maintenance of norms and standards in the teacher education system etc. throughout the country.
4. section 12 of
was enacted, several functions enlisted in the section have been assigned to the ncte, which includes laying down guidelines in respect of minimum qualifications for a person to be employed as a teacher in schools or in recognized institutions. section 32 of
confers on the ncte power to make regulations. sub-clause (d)(i) of sub-section (2) of section 32 provides that the ncte may lay down minimum qualifications for a person to be employed as a teacher under clause (d) of section 12. under section 33 of
, the regulations made by the ncte are required to be laid before each house of parliament and it is only upon due approval of such regulations or upon modifications as may be made by the parliament that the regulations take effect.
5. in exercise of powers conferred on the ncte under section 32(2)(d)(i) of
, it framed a set of regulations viz.
. in the schedule to the said regulations, the minimum academic and professional qualifications for recruitment of teachers at different levels have been stipulated.
the said regulations further contemplated that the existing
would be modified within a period of three years so as to bring such rules in conformity with the qualifications prescribed in the schedule to the regulations.
6. in the state of assam, in march 1999, a pre-service teacher's training course of two years duration leading to award of diploma had been introduced and the admission to the said course was regulated by an advertisement published in the newspapers on 14th april, 1999. in the said advertisement, it was mentioned that the pre-service training course leading to an award of diploma in education, for which applications were invited, had been designed to secure improvement of the professional skill of the persons to be recruited as teachers in elementary schools against the vacancies that will occur in the near future. admittedly, most of the writ petitioners had applied for joining the diploma course pursuant to the said notice/advertisement and thus, completed the two years course leading to the award of diploma. after the commencement of the said course in the year 2000, two batches, totalling 900 persons, completed the course, qualified and were awarded diploma. however, the state government discontinued the course with effect from the year 2003.
7. it seems that on the insistence of the ncte, the state of assam amended the
with effect from 10th november, 2005. by the said amendment instead of making the requirement of a diploma in teachers training mandatory, as stipulated in the regulations framed by the ncte, it was provided that preference to trained candidates will be given. schedule-i to the amended rules stipulated that such preference will be in the form of 10 additional marks to trained teachers in the selection process for the recruitment of teachers. having carried out the said amendment, an employment notice dated 2nd december, 2005 was issued in the newspapers inviting applications for filling up 5372 posts of assistant teachers. the prescribed minimum educational qualification was higher secondary, with preference to trained candidates.
8. being aggrieved by the said amendment which waived the requirement of a diploma for selection of teachers, a group of writ petitions were filed, seeking quashing of
, inter-alia, on the ground that the amendment was not in conformity with the statutory regulations framed by the ncte. a prayer for setting aside advertisement dated 2nd december 2005 was also made.
9. in the writ proceedings, the state chose not to spell out its stand on the is- sue, inasmuch as neither a counter affidavit on its behalf was filed nor any instructions were imparted to the counsel representing it before the high court. under the given circumstances, the high court proceeded to decide the writ petitions on the basis of the material available on record.
10. as stated above, by the impugned judgment, the high court has struck down
insofar as the recruitment process initiated by the issue of advertisement dated 2nd december 2005 by the state government, granting preference to the trained teachers was concerned, the high court observed that since
, which had now been adjudged as illegal and ultra vires
, were in force when the said advertisement was issued, if the state is inclined to complete the recruitment process initiated pursuant to the said advertisement, it may be completed in terms of the said advertisement. however, henceforth and in the future, the process of recruitment of teachers in the lower primary schools will have to conform to the requirement of academic and professional qualifications spelt out by the
.
11. being aggrieved with the observations in respect of advertisement dated 2nd december 2005, the diploma holders are before us in these appeals.
12. at the outset, it is pertinent to note that the state government has not questioned the correctness of the impugned judgments. however, in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the state, it is stated that in further- ance of the recruitment process, a select list had been prepared by the district committees but the same could not be published because of certain directions by the gauhati high court in another set of cases filed for regularization of obb teachers.
