the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice d. k. jain
1. challenge in these appeals, by special leave, is to the judgments and orders dated 27th march, 2001 and 22nd january, 2003 delivered by a division bench of the gauhati high court at guwahati in writ appeal no. 548 of 1996 whereby it has directed appellant no.1 viz. union of india to regularize the services of the members of the respondent union, employed by the border roads organization (for short the "bro"), as postulated in office memo no. sectt. brdb id no. brdb/04(90)/99- ge-ii dated 2nd february, 2001. appellants no. 2 to 17 are the functionaries of appellant no. 1.
2. shorn of unnecessary details, the facts essential for adjudication of the present appeals may be stated as follows:
the respondent is a registered trade union comprising of casual workers employed by the bro, in terms of paragraph 503 of the
3. vide judgment dated 27th august, 1996, the high court allowed the writ petition, and directed appellant no.1 to regularize the services of the members of the respondent who have been in service for more than five years, within six months of the date of order.
4. being aggrieved, appellants filed a writ appeal before a division bench of the gauhati high court. the division bench, while partly allowing the appeal, modified the order of the single judge on the basis of a circular dated 25th may, 1988 issued by one brig. s.k. mehta, d.d.g. (p & v), for and on behalf of the director general border roads, new delhi to all chief engineers for consideration of regularization of casually paid labourers employed by the bro. the division bench held that:
6. being aggrieved by the directions of the division bench, the appellants preferred an appeal, by special leave, before this court. vide order dated 19th february, 1999, this court, while allowing the appeal and remanding the matter back to the division bench, observed thus:
7. during the course of fresh hearing of the writ appeal before the division bench, senior central government standing counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants stated that pursuant to circular dated 25th may 1988, the appellants had framed a scheme vide office memo no. sectt. brdb id no. brdb/04(90)/99-ge-ii dated 2nd february, 2001, for the welfare of casually paid employees. upon perusal of the scheme and recording the satisfaction of the counsel appearing for the respondent-union, the court observed that the scheme had been framed on a rational basis. accordingly, disposing of the writ appeal on the basis of the said office memo, the division bench directed the appellants to implement the said office memo dated 2nd february, 2001.
8. still being aggrieved, the appellants preferred a review application before the high court. vide the impugned order, the division bench declined to entertain the said application.
9. hence, the present appeals against the main judgment and the order in review.
