the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice aftab alam
1. the appellant, industrial investment bank of india limited ("iibil" for short), is the successor of the industrial reconstruction bank of india ("irbi" for short) constituted under section 3(1) of the
, ("the 1984 act" for short).
2. in the year 1985, the irbi had sanctioned a loan of rupees twenty two lakhs (rs.22,00,000/-) in favour of m/s jain cables pvt. ltd., respondent no.1. out of the sanctioned amount a sum of rupees twenty lakhs (rs.20,00,000/-) was actually disbursed in the year 1991 and the balance amount of the loan was cancelled. the repayment of the loan was secured by mortgage of the immovable properties of the borrower company and by creating the charge of hypothecation over its immovable properties in favour of the irbi. the borrower company defaulted in repayment of the loan and in 1994, on its request, the irbi granted to it an amended schedule of payment under which the last installment of the loan amount was to be paid on february 15, 1996. the respondent no.1 did not adhere even to the rescheduled payment plan.
3. on march 27, 1997, the
("the 1997 act" for short) came into force and by virtue of notification, s.o. 242 (e), dated march 25, 1997 the undertakings of the irbi were transferred to and vested in the iibil with effect from march 27, 1997.
4. on august 14, 1997, the iibil gave a notice to respondent no.1 under section 38 of the
recalling the loan. the notice did not bring any payments from respondent no.1 and after about 2 years from the date of the notice, in the year 1999, the iibil filed an application before the rajasthan high court, under section 40 of the
. the application filed by the iibil was registered in the high court as s.b.c. misc. application no.40/99. the high court issued notice on the application but after hearing the other side, rejected it by order dated november 1, 2002 holding that the application was not maintainable as it was filed under the provision of a repealed act. the high court in its brief order referred to section 40 of the
and the repeal and saving provision as contained in section 13 of the
and took the view that the provision of section 40 of the
was purely procedural and it simply provided the irbi with an additional forum besides those available under section 39 of the
and section 69 of the
. on the other hand, the provision of repeal contained in section 13 of the
was definite and categorical and the provision of section 40 of the
was not saved by sub-section (2) of section 13 of the
. in other words, according to the high court, the application was filed under a provision that was no longer in existence. in this connection, the high court held and observed as follows:
5. for the sake of the record, it may also be noted that during the pendency of the proceeding before the high court, the iibil also moved the debt recovery tribunal. but its application to the debt recovery tribunal was against the guarantor alone and no relief was claimed against respondent no.1, the borrower company. the application against the guarantor was decreed ex parte but the decree has so far not borne any fruits as it was a personal guarantee and there were no assets against which the decree may be executed.
6. the iibil has now brought this matter in appeal, by grant of special leave, against the order of the high court dated november 1, 2002 rejecting its application filed against the borrower company, respondent no.1, under section 40 of the
.
7. at this stage, it will be useful to take a look at some of the provisions of the
and the
. section 2(a) of the
defined "assistance" to mean any direct or indirect financial, managerial or technical assistance granted by the reconstruction bank in pursuance of its business referred to in section 18. section 2(c) defined "assisted industrial concern" to mean any industrial concern to which any assistance was given by the reconstruction bank. chapter viii of the act contained sections 36 to 51 dealing with the "special powers of the reconstruction bank". section 38, in that chapter, authorized the irbi, under certain conditions enumerated in clauses (a) to (f), to ask, by notice in writing, any industrial concern to which it had granted any assistance to forthwith discharge in full its entire dues and also discharge its other liabilities to the bank. the statutory provision expressly overrode anything contained in any agreement to the contrary. section 39 dealt with the rights of the irbi in case of default by any assisted industrial concern. section 40 of the
provided for the enforcement of claims by the irbi and in so far as relevant for the present it is as under:
. section 2(a) of the
defines "appointed day" which is march 27, 1997 vide notification dated march 25, 1997 issued by the central government and published in the gazette of india, extra., of that date. section 2(b) defines "company" to mean the industrial development bank of india ltd to be formed and registered under the
. section 2(c) defines "reconstruction bank" to mean the industrial reconstruction bank of india established under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the
. section 3 of the
provides that on the appointed date (march 27, 1997) the undertakings of the reconstruction bank shall be transferred to and vest in the company. section 4 of the
(emphasis added)
9. section 13 of the
10.
