(non-reportable)
the judgment was delivered by : hon'ble justice g. s. singhvi
1. whether letter dated 16.11.1985 issued by the director of industries, uttar pradesh (appellant no.2) conveying acceptance of the bid given by the respondent for supply of 200 metric tonnes zinc sulphate, agriculture grade, could be treated as an agreement executed by the parties, whether the respondent could invoke the arbitration clause contained in the tender document, whether the arbitrator appointed by civil judge (senior division), lucknow (hereinafter referred to as 'the trial court') acted in violation of the rules of natural justice by declining the appellants' prayer for adjournment and whether the award passed by the arbitrator is vitiated by patent error of law are the questions which arise for consideration in this appeal filed by the state of u.p. and two others against the judgment of the division bench of the allahabad high court, which dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellants against the order passed by the trial court making award of the arbitrator rule of the court.
tender form:
3. the bid given by the respondent (rs.5,451/- per metric tonne) was found to be the lowest. the purchase committee of the directorate of industries approved the same. thereafter, appellant no.2 issued acceptance letter dated 16.11.1985 to the respondent for supply of 200 metric tonnes of zinc sulphate to the directorate of agriculture. the relevant portions of that letter are extracted below:
(emphasis supplied)
4. the respondent deposited the security money and dispatched a signed agreement to the directorate of agriculture for completion of other formalities. it also sent letters to appellant no.3 for issue of supply order, but the latter did not respond apparently because the lowest rate of rs.4,500 per metric tonne quoted in response to another tender notice issued by appellant no.2 for supply of zinc sulphate on rate contract basis was substantially less than the rate quoted by the respondent and, therefore, the purchase committee decided to postpone implementation of the acceptance letter dated 16.11.1985.
5. when the respondent learnt about the aforesaid decision, it served a notice upon the appellants and then filed a petition under section 20 of the
(for short, '
') for appointment of an arbitrator to decide the dispute relating to supply of 200 metric tonnes of zinc sulphate. the same was registered as regular suit no. 244/1998. in the written statement filed on behalf of the appellants, it was pleaded that the petition was not maintainable because no contract had been executed between the parties and no order for supply of the goods was placed with the respondent because the other firm had quoted much lower rate.
6. by an order dated 28.3.1989, the trial court overruled the objections raised on behalf of the appellants and held that a contract was indeed executed between the parties for supply of zinc sulphate. the trial court then referred to clause 16 of the tender form and directed the parties to propose name of their respective arbitrator within 20 days with the rider that if they fail to do so, then the court will appoint an arbitrator.
7. the appellants did not nominate the arbitrator. therefore, by an order dated 20.5.1989, the trial court appointed shri dipak seth, advocate as an arbitrator.
8. the arbitrator fixed 6.8.1989 for preliminary hearing but no one appeared on behalf of the appellants. the respondent filed statement of claim for award of compensation to the tune of rs.42,92,015.90 along with cost of rs.25,000/-. the details of the claim lodged by the respondent are reproduced below:
9. on 1.10.1981, shri b.k. bajpai, accountant in the office of the director of agriculture, appeared before the arbitrator and sought 15 days' time to intimate the fate of the appeal filed against order dated 28.3.1989, which was pending before the high court. on the next date of hearing i.e., 1.11.1989, shri irshad hussain appeared on behalf of the director of agriculture and made a request for adjournment on the ground that appellant nos. 1 and 2 were intending to file an application for stay of proceedings pending before the arbitrator. however, no stay order appears to have been passed by the high court in the pending appeal. therefore, the arbitrator passed an ex parte award dated 17.11.1989 and allowed the respondent's claim to the extent of rs.23,44,200/- with interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of the award till the date of payment. soon thereafter, the respondent filed regular suit no.537 of 1989 for making the award rule of the court. the appellants filed objections and reiterated their plea that no contract had been executed between the parties. they also pleaded that the arbitrator had committed an error by refusing to adjourn the matter ignoring that the appeal filed against order dated 28.3.1989 was pending before the high court. the trial court rejected the objections and passed order dated 25.11.2004 whereby the award of the arbitrator was made rule of the court.
10. when first appeal no. 165/1989 filed by the appellants against the first order of the trial court was taken up for hearing, it was brought to the notice of the high court that the arbitrator has already pronounced the award. after taking cognizance of this fact, the division bench of the high court dismissed the appeal as infructuous with liberty to the parties to challenge the award on any legally permissible ground.
11. the appellants challenged trial court's order dated 25.11.2004 in first appeal no.533 of 2005. while admitting the appeal, the high court stayed execution of the award subject to the condition of deposit of rs.10 lacs. accordingly, the appellants deposited the amount, which was withdrawn by the respondent.
12. by the impugned judgment, the high court finally dismissed by the appeal. the appellants' objection to the appointment of the arbitrator on the ground that no contract had been executed between the parties was overruled by the high court by relying upon the judgments of this court in union of india and others v. n.k. private ltd. and another (1973) 3 scc 388
